目录

Chapter 1

Chapter 2

Chapter 3

Chapter 4

Chapter 5

Chapter 6

Chapter 7

Chapter 8

Chapter 9

Chapter 10

Chapter 11

Chapter 12

Chapter 13

Chapter 14

Chapter 15

Chapter 16

Chapter 17

Chapter 18

Chapter 19

Chapter 20

Chapter 21

Chapter 22

Chapter 23

Chapter 24

Chapter 25

Chapter 26

Chapter 27

Chapter 28

Chapter 29

Chapter 30

Chapter 31

Chapter 32

Chapter 33

Chapter 34

Chapter 35

CONCLUSION





Chapter 1


第一章

"TOM!"

“汤姆！”

No answer.

没人答应。

"TOM!"

“汤姆！”

No answer.

又没人答应。

"What's gone with that boy, I wonder? You TOM!"

“这孩子怎么啦，我说？你这个汤姆！”

No answer.

还是没有人答应。

The old lady pulled her spectacles down and looked over them about the room; then she put them up and looked out under them. She seldom or never looked through them for so small a thing as a boy; they were her state pair, the pride of her heart, and were built for "style," not service — she could have seen through a pair of stove lids just as well. She looked perplexed for a moment, and then said, not fiercely, but still loud enough for the furniture to hear:

老太太拉低了眼镜，从镜片上方朝房间周围看了看，然后又抬高眼镜，从镜片底下张望着。她很少或者说从来没有戴正眼镜来看一个像小男孩儿这么微不足道的东西。这副眼镜相当考究，是她引以为豪的宝贝，可不是为了实用，而是为了“装饰”，她即使透过两片炉子盖儿也照样看得一清二楚。她不知所措地愣了会儿，然后虽然不是凶神恶煞地，但嗓门高得哪儿都能听得见，她说：

"Well, I lay if I get hold of you I'll — "

“好，我发誓如果我抓到你，我就——”

She did not finish, for by this time she was bending down and punching under the bed with the broom, and so she needed breath to punctuate the punches with. She resurrected nothing but the cat.

她话没说完，因为这时候她正弯腰拿扫把往床下面杵，每杵一下就需要停下来喘口气。结果她只杵出一只猫来。

"I never did see the beat of that boy!"

“我还从没见过这样的孩子！”

She went to the open door and stood in it and looked out among the tomato vines and "jimpson" weeds that constituted the garden. No Tom. So she lifted up her voice at an angle calculated for distance and shouted:

她走到敞开的门口，站在那儿朝满园子的番茄藤和吉普逊草丛里望了望，想找到汤姆。还是没有。于是，她扯开嗓子朝远处高声喊道：

"Y-o-u-u Tom!"

“汤姆啊，汤姆！”

There was a slight noise behind her and she turned just in time to seize a small boy by the slack of his roundabout and arrest his flight.

这时候，她身后有阵轻微的响动，她一转身刚好抓住了一个小男孩儿的短外套衣角，他这下可跑不掉了。

"There! I might 'a' thought of that closet. What you been doing in there?"

“嘿，在这儿呢！我早就该想到那个壁橱。你躲在那儿干什么呢？”

"Nothing."

“没干什么。”

"Nothing! Look at your hands. And look at your mouth. What is that truck?"

“没干什么！瞧瞧你那双手。再看看你那张嘴。你浑身上下都是什么啊？”

"I don't know, aunt."

“我不知道，姨妈。”

"Well, I know. It's jam — that's what it is. Forty times I've said if you didn't let that jam alone I'd skin you. Hand me that switch."

“啊，我知道了。是果酱——对，没错，就是。我跟你说了得有四十遍了，不要动我的果酱，否则我就扒了你的皮。把鞭子给我。”

The switch hovered in the air — the peril was desperate —

鞭子在空中晃晃悠悠，危险迫在眉睫。

"My! Look behind you, aunt!"

“啊，天哪！瞧你身后，姨妈！”

The old lady whirled round, and snatched her skirts out of danger. The lad fled on the instant, scrambled up the high board fence, and disappeared over it.

老太太以为有危险，急忙撩起裙子转过身。汤姆这小家伙赶紧撒丫子就跑，爬上老高的木栅栏，一转眼就没影儿了。

His aunt Polly stood surprised a moment, and then broke into a gentle laugh.

他的波莉姨妈站在那儿先是一愣，随后轻声笑了起来。

"Hang the boy, can't I never learn anything? Ain't he played me tricks enough like that for me to be looking out for him by this time? But old fools is the biggest fools there is. Can't learn an old dog new tricks, as the saying is. But my goodness, he never plays them alike, two days, and how is a body to know what's coming? He 'pears to know just how long he can torment me before I get my dander up, and he knows if he can make out to put me off for a minute or make me laugh, it's all down again and I can't hit him a lick. I ain't doing my duty by that boy, and that's the Lord's truth, goodness knows. Spare the rod and spoil the child, as the Good Book says. I'm a-laying up sin and suffering for us both, I know. He's full of the Old Scratch, but laws-a-me! He's my own dead sister's boy, poor thing, and I ain't got the heart to lash him, somehow. Every time I let him off, my conscience does hurt me so, and every time I hit him my old heart most breaks. Well-a-well, man that is born of woman is of few days and full of trouble, as the Scripture says, and I reckon it's so. He'll play hooky this evening , and I'll just be obliged to make him work, to-morrow, to punish him. It's mighty hard to make him work Saturdays, when all the boys are having holiday, but he hates work more than he hates anything else, and I've got to do some of my duty by him, or I'll be the ruination of the child."

“这该死的，我怎么老是不吸取教训？到现在他跟我开这种玩笑也不少了，难道我还不该提防着点吗？老糊涂是最大的糊涂蛋。俗话说得好，老狗学不会新把戏。可是老天哪，他的鬼把戏从来没有两天一样的，谁知道他下回要耍什么花招？他好像对折磨我多长时间才会把我惹毛了如指掌，也知道只要能想个法子哄哄我，逗我笑笑，就会什么事也没有了，我也不会揍他。对那孩子我可是没尽到责任。上帝知道这千真万确。正如《圣经》里所言，孩子不打不成器。我犯了溺爱孩子的罪孽，让我俩都受罪，我知道。他一肚子坏水儿，哎呦！可他是我那死去姐姐的儿子，我总是不忍心揍他。每次我饶了他，我良心上过不去。可每次我打他，我这心都要碎了。哎，罢了罢了，就像《圣经》里说的，人为母生，光阴荏苒，多苦多难。我看这话说得没错。他今天下午要是再逃学，我明天就让他干活儿了，惩罚惩罚他。星期六让他干活恐怕是苛刻了点，所有孩子都放假呢。可他最痛恨的就是干活了。我必须对他尽点责任，要不我就把这孩子给毁了。”

Tom did play hooky, and he had a very good time. He got back home barely in season to help Jim, the small colored boy, saw next day's wood and split the kindlings before supper — at least he was there in time to tell his adventures to Jim while Jim did three fourths of the work. Tom's younger brother (or rather half-brother) Sid was already through with his part of the work (picking up chips), for he was a quiet boy, and had no adventurous, troublesome ways.

汤姆确实逃学了，而且痛痛快快玩儿了一场。他回家时正好赶上帮那小黑孩吉姆的忙，帮他在晚饭前锯第二天用的木头，劈引火用的柴——至少他及时赶到那儿，把他冒险所干的事讲给吉姆听，而活却是吉姆干了四分之三。汤姆的弟弟（确切地说是同母异父的弟弟）希德已干完了他那摊活（捡碎木块），因为他是个好静的孩子，从不干什么冒险的事，也不惹什么麻烦。

While Tom was eating his supper, and stealing sugar as opportunity offered, Aunt Polly asked him questions that were full of guile, and very deep — for she wanted to trap him into damaging revealments. Like many other simple-hearted souls, it was her pet vanity to believe she was endowed with a talent for dark and mysterious diplomacy, and she loved to contemplate her most transparent devices as marvels of low cunning. Said she:

汤姆吃晚饭的时候，只要有机会就偷糖吃，波莉姨妈这时开始问他话，话里充满诡计，深藏玄机——因为她要给他设点圈套，自己吐出真话来，给他致命性打击。跟其他很多头脑简单的人一样，她自负得很，相信自己天生有耍弄诡秘狡猾手腕的才能，认为自己极易被人识破的伎俩妙得令人惊叹。她说： “汤姆，学校里挺热的，是吧？”

"Tom, it was middling warm in school, warn't it?"

“汤姆，学校里挺热的，是吧？”

"Yes'm."

“对，姨妈。”

"Powerful warm, warn't it?"

“热得厉害，对吧？”

"Yes'm."

“是，姨妈。”

"Didn't you want to go in a-swimming, Tom?"

“你是不是想去游泳来着，汤姆？”

A bit of a scare shot through Tom — a touch of uncomfortable suspicion. He searched Aunt Polly's face, but it told him nothing. So he said:

汤姆忽然觉得有点儿害怕——一丝不安的疑虑袭上心头。他偷看波莉姨妈的脸色，可是没看出个所以然来。于是他说：

"No'm — well, not very much."

“没有啊，姨妈——呃，没怎么想去。”

The old lady reached out her hand and felt Tom's shirt, and said:

老太太伸出手，摸了摸汤姆的衬衫，说道：

"But you ain't too warm now, though." And it flattered her to reflect that she had discovered that the shirt was dry without anybody knowing that that was what she had in her mind. But in spite of her, Tom knew where the wind lay, now. So he forestalled what might be the next move:

“可是你现在不怎么热吧。”想到她发现衬衣是干的而没人知道她的真正用意是什么，老太太得意洋洋。可不管老太太怎么样，汤姆现在猜透了她的心思。因此他先下手一步，防范老太太的下一招：

"Some of us pumped on our heads — mine's damp yet. See?"

“有些人往我们头上泼水——我的头发还是湿的呢。看见了吧？”

Aunt Polly was vexed to think she had overlooked that bit of circumstantial evidence, and missed a trick. Then she had a new inspiration:

波莉姨妈懊恼不已，她居然没注意到这个明摆着的事实，错过了一次施伎俩的机会。可接着她灵机一动，计上心来：

"Tom, you didn't have to undo your shirt collar where I sewed it, to pump on your head, did you? Unbutton your jacket!"

“汤姆，你往头上浇水的时候，不必拆掉我给你衬衫上缝的领子吧？把上衣的纽扣解开！”

The trouble vanished out of Tom's face. He opened his jacket. His shirt collar was securely sewed.

不安马上从汤姆脸上消失了。他解开上衣，衬衣的领子还是缝得好好的。

"Bother! Well, go 'long with you. I'd made sure you'd played hooky and been a-swimming. But I forgive ye, Tom. I reckon you're a kind of a singed cat, as the saying is — better'n you look. This time."

“怪了！得了，算了吧。我以为你逃课去游泳了。不过我饶了你，汤姆。我看你就是俗话里说的那种烧焦毛的猫——比外表看起来要好。下不为例。”

She was half sorry her sagacity had miscarried, and half glad that Tom had stumbled into obedient conduct for once.

她既为自己的计谋落空而遗憾，又为汤姆能有一次如此温顺听话而高兴。

But Sidney said:

可是希德却说：

"Well, now, if I didn't think you sewed his collar with white thread, but it's black."

“呃，我记得你好像给他缝领子用的是白线，可现在却是黑线。”

"Why, I did sew it with white! Tom!"

“哎呀，我的确用白线缝的！汤姆！”

But Tom did not wait for the rest. As he went out at the door he said:

可汤姆没等听完话就走了。他走出门口的时候说：

"Siddy, I'll lick you for that."

“希德，为这我可要狠狠揍你一顿。”

In a safe place Tom examined two large needles which were thrust into the lapels of his jacket, and had thread bound about them — one needle carried white thread and the other black. He said:

在一个安全的地方，汤姆仔细看了看别在上衣翻领上的两根大的缝衣针，针上还绕着线，一根绕着白线，另一根绕着黑线。

"She'd never noticed if it hadn't been for Sid. Confound it! sometimes she sews it with white, and sometimes she sews it with black. I wish to geeminy she'd stick to one or t'other — I can't keep the run of 'em. But I bet you I'll lam Sid for that. I'll learn him!"

他说： “如果不是希德，她是永远不会注意到的。真讨厌！有时候她用白线缝，有时候又用黑线。我真希望她总是用白线或者黑线——换来换去我实在记不住。不过，我发誓非揍希德一顿不可。我要好好教训教训他！”

He was not the Model Boy of the village. He knew the model boy very well though — and loathed him.

汤姆不是村里的模范男孩，但他熟知那位模范男孩——并且对他深恶痛绝。

Within two minutes, or even less, he had forgotten all his troubles. Not because his troubles were one whit less heavy and bitter to him than a man's are to a man, but because a new and powerful interest bore them down and drove them out of his mind for the time — just as men's misfortunes are forgotten in the excitement of new enterprises. This new interest was a valued novelty in whistling, which he had just acquired from a negro, and he was suffering to practise it undisturbed. It consisted in a peculiar birdlike turn, a sort of liquid warble, produced by touching the tongue to the roof of the mouth at short intervals in the midst of the music — the reader probably remembers how to do it, if he has ever been a boy. Diligence and attention soon gave him the knack of it, and he strode down the street with his mouth full of harmony and his soul full of gratitude. He felt much as an astronomer feels who has discovered a new planet — no doubt, as far as strong, deep, unalloyed pleasure is concerned, the advantage was with the boy, not the astronomer.

不到两分钟，甚至更短时间，他已经把所有烦恼抛到脑后了。并不是因为他的烦恼没有大人们的沉重和难受，而是因为一种更新鲜、更强烈的兴趣暂时压倒并且驱散了心中的烦恼——正如大人们为新奇之事而兴奋的时候，也会忘记自己的不幸一样。这种新鲜的兴趣就是颇有价值的口哨新式吹法，是他刚从一个黑人那儿学到的，现在他正想要不被打扰地专心练习。这口哨声就像某种特别的鸟叫声，一种流畅婉转的啼鸣。吹这个调子时候，舌头断断续续地碰上牙膛——读者如果曾经也是孩子的话，可能还记得怎么吹。孜孜不倦和一心一意使他迅速掌握了要领。他大步流星地沿着大街走着，口中吹着口哨，心里满是感激。那股乐劲儿就像天文学家发现了一颗新的行星一样——毫无疑问，就快乐的强烈、深切和纯粹程度而言，汤姆比天文学家更高兴。

The summer evenings were long. It was not dark, yet. Presently Tom checked his whistle. A stranger was before him — a boy a shade larger than himself. A new-comer of any age or either sex was an impressive curiosity in the poor little shabby village of St. Petersburg. This boy was well dressed, too — well dressed on a weekday. This was simply astounding. His cap was a dainty thing, his close-buttoned blue cloth roundabout was new and natty, and so were his pantaloons. He had shoes on — and it was only Friday. He even wore a necktie, a bright bit of ribbon. He had a citified air about him that ate into Tom's vitals. The more Tom stared at the splendid marvel, the higher he turned up his nose at his finery and the shabbier his own outfit seemed to him to grow. Neither boy spoke. If one moved, the other moved — but only sidewise, in a circle; they kept face to face and eye to eye all the time. Finally Tom said:

夏天的下午很漫长。现在天还没黑。汤姆的口哨声戛然而止。他面前出现了一个陌生人——一个个头比他大点的男孩。在圣彼德堡这个贫穷、破落的小村子里，不管是男的还是女的，老的还是少的，只要是新来的，就能引起人们的极大的好奇心。而且这个男孩穿得很讲究——在平日里还穿得这么讲究。仅这一点就足以让人震惊了。他的帽子很精致，蓝色的上衣扣得紧紧的，又新又整洁，他的裤子也是一样。他还穿着鞋——今天可只是星期五！他甚至还打了条领带，是条颜色鲜亮的丝质领带。他摆出一副城里人的架势，汤姆对此感到很不自在。汤姆越是盯着那身让人叹为观止的行头，对那男孩的漂亮衣服把鼻子翘得越高，越觉得自己的衣服寒酸破旧。两个人都一声不吭。一个挪动一步，另一个也挪一步——可都是斜着步子兜圈子。他俩面对面，眼对眼这样一直相持着。最后还是汤姆先开了腔：

"I can lick you!"

“我能揍你一顿！”

"I'd like to see you try it."

“我倒想见识见识。”

"Well, I can do it."

“好啊，我就打给你看。”

"No you can't, either."

“得了，你不行。”

"Yes I can."

“我行。”

"No you can't."

“你就是不行。”

"I can."

“我就是行。”

"You can't."

“不行！”

"Can!"

“行！”

"Can't!"

“不行！”

An uncomfortable pause. Then Tom said:

两个人都不自在地停了下来。接着汤姆问道：

"What's your name?"

“你叫什么名字？”

" 'Tisn't any of your business, maybe."

“这也许你就管不着了。”

"Well I 'low I'll make it my business."

“哼，我就管得着！”

"Well why don't you?"

“好啊，那你就管管看。”

"If you say much, I will."

“要是你再啰嗦，我就管给你看。”

"Much — much — MUCH. There now."

“啰嗦——啰嗦——偏要啰嗦。我就啰嗦了，怎么着吧。”

"Oh, you think you're mighty smart, don't you? I could lick you with one hand tied behind me, if I wanted to."

“哦，你认为你自己很了不起，是不是？如果我想打倒你的话，一只手背在后面都能打过你。”

"Well why don't you do it? You say you can do it."

“那你为什么不动手啊？你说你能揍我一顿。”

"Well I will, if you fool with me."

“如果你老是戏弄我的话，我就打给你看。”

"Oh yes — I've seen whole families in the same fix."

“哈，你这种人我见得多了去了。”

"Smarty! You think you're some, now, don't you? Oh, what a hat!"

“得了吧！你自认为现在是号人物，是吧？哎呦，瞧你那帽子！”

"You can lump that hat if you don't like it. I dare you to knock it off — and anybody that'll take a dare will suck eggs."

“你要是看不顺眼你就把它摘下来呀，如果你敢碰，我就揍扁你——谁敢谁就等着瞧吧。

"You're a liar!"

“你吹牛。”

"You're another."

“你也吹牛。”

"You're a fighting liar and dasn't take it up."

“你光是讲大话，不敢动手。”

"Aw — take a walk!"

“去，滚你的蛋吧！”

"Say — if you give me much more of your sass I'll take and bounce a rock off 'n your head."

“告诉你——你要是再骂我的话，我就拿块石头砸碎你的脑袋。”

"Oh, of course you will."

“那好，你就来砸啊！”

"Well I will."

“我肯定会的。”

"Well why don't you do it then? What do you keep saying you will for? Why don't you do it? It's because you're afraid."

“那你干吗不动手啊？为什么老是光说不练呢？怎么不动手啊？因为你害怕了。”

"I ain't afraid."

“我才不怕呢。”

"You are."

“你怕。”

"I ain't."

“我不怕！”

"You are."

“你就是怕！”

Another pause, and more eyeing and sidling around each other. Presently they were shoulder to shoulder. Tom said:

两个人又暂停了一会儿。接着又眼对眼，相互虎视眈眈地兜着圈子。忽然两个人肩抵着肩了。汤姆说：

"Get away from here!"

“你从这儿滚吧！”

"Go away yourself!"

“你自己滚吧！”

"I won't."

“我才不滚呢。”

"I won't either."

“我也不滚。”

So they stood, each with a foot placed at an angle as a brace, and both shoving with might and main, and glowering at each other with hate. But neither could get an advantage. After struggling till both were hot and flushed, each relaxed his strain with watchful caution, and Tom said:

于是他俩站在那儿，都斜着一只脚撑着劲，用尽力气想把对手往后推，两人怒目相视。可谁也没能占上风。他们直到斗得浑身发热，满脸通红，两人稍稍放松，却都小心谨慎地提防着对方。汤姆又说：

"You're a coward and a pup. I'll tell my big brother on you, and he can thrash you with his little finger, and I'll make him do it, too."

“你是个胆小鬼，是个狗崽子。我要向我大哥告你的状，他只要动动小指头就能把你捏碎，我也会让他揍你的。”

"What do I care for your big brother? I've got a brother that's bigger than he is — and what's more, he can throw him over that fence, too." (Both brothers were imaginary.)

“我可不怕你什么大哥，我有一个比你大哥还大的大哥——而且我大哥能把你的大哥从那堵篱笆围墙扔过去。”（两个人的所谓的大哥都是虚构的。）

"That's a lie."

“你骗人。”

"Your saying so don't make it so."

“你说的也不是真的。”

Tom drew a line in the dust with his big toe, and said: "I dare you to step over that, and I'll lick you till you can't stand up. Anybody that'll take a dare will steal sheep."

汤姆用大脚趾头在地上的灰土上划了一道线，然后说：“你要是敢跨过这道线，我就把你打趴在地上，直到你站不起来。谁敢，谁就得吃不了兜着走。”

The new boy stepped over promptly, and said: "Now you said you'd do it, now let's see you do it."

这个新来的男孩毫不犹豫地跨过那道线，说道：“你说你敢打我，现在来看看你怎么打法。”

"Don't you crowd me now; you better look out."

“你别逼我啊！你最好还是给我小心点。”

"Well, you said you'd do it — why don't you do it?"

“哎，你不是说要打我吗？——你怎么不动手啊？”

"By jingo! for two cents I will do it."

“得了，“你要是给我两分钱，我就动手。”

The new boy took two broad coppers out of his pocket and held them out with derision. Tom struck them to the ground. In an instant both boys were rolling and tumbling in the dirt, gripped together like cats; and for the space of a minute they tugged and tore at each other's hair and clothes, punched and scratched each other's nose, and covered themselves with dust and glory. Presently the confusion took form, and through the fog of battle Tom appeared, seated astride the new boy, and pounding him with his fists.

这个新来的男孩果真从口袋里掏出两个硕大的铜币，嘲弄地摊开手掌。汤姆一把将钱打到地上。两个人立刻在地上的尘土里滚打，像两只猫一样撕扯起来。紧接着又是扯头发，又是揪衣服，拼命地捶打着，抓着对方的鼻子。两个人都弄得浑身是土，却又都威风凛凛。谁胜谁败逐渐见了分晓，汤姆从打斗扬起的尘土中爬起来，骑在那个男孩的身上，攥紧拳头使劲地打那个男孩。

"Holler 'nuff!" said he.

“求饶吧！”他说。

The boy only struggled to free himself. He was crying — mainly from rage.

那个男孩只想挣脱出来。他号啕大哭——主要是因为气愤。

"Holler 'nuff!" — and the pounding went on.

“求饶吧！”汤姆还在继续揍他。

At last the stranger got out a smothered " 'Nuff!" and Tom let him up and said:

最后那男孩挤出了“饶了我”，汤姆让他站起来，然后说道：

"Now that'll learn you. Better look out who you're fooling with next time."

“以后给我记着。下次最好看清楚你在作弄谁。”

The new boy went off brushing the dust from his clothes, sobbing, snuffling, and occasionally looking back and shaking his head and threatening what he would do to Tom the "next time he caught him out." To which Tom responded with jeers, and started off in high feather, and as soon as his back was turned the new boy snatched up a stone, threw it and hit him between the shoulders and then turned tail and ran like an antelope. Tom chased the traitor home, and thus found out where he lived. He then held a position at the gate for some time, daring the enemy to come outside, but the enemy only made faces at him through the window and declined. At last the enemy's mother appeared, and called Tom a bad, vicious, vulgar child, and ordered him away. So he went away; but he said he "'lowed" to "lay" for that boy.

新来的男孩拍拍身上的尘土，哭哭啼啼地走开了。他不时地回过头来，摇晃着脑袋，吓唬汤姆：“下次要是抓住你……”汤姆对此不屑一顾，趾高气扬地走开了。他的背刚一转过来，那男孩子就抓起一块石头朝他砸过来，正打在汤姆的背心，接着就夹着尾巴，像羚羊似的飞快地跑掉了。汤姆穷追不舍，直追到他家，也因此知道了他家在哪儿。他就站在人家大门口，嚷着叫那男孩出来较量，可是那个死对头只是在窗子里朝他做鬼脸，就是不出去。最后死对头的妈妈出来了，骂汤姆是个邪恶下流的坏孩子，喝斥他赶快滚开。于是汤姆就走了，不过，他临走时说还要寻机再教训教训那混小子一顿。

He got home pretty late that night, and when he climbed cautiously in at the window, he uncovered an ambuscade, in the person of his aunt; and when she saw the state his clothes were in her resolution to turn his Saturday holiday into captivity at hard labor became adamantine in its firmness.

那天晚上他回家很晚。当他小心翼翼地从窗户往里爬时，猛然间发现有埋伏，原来是他的波莉姨妈。她看到他衣服被弄成那副样子，更坚定了让他在周六假期干苦活儿的决心。





Chapter 2


第二章

SATURDAY morning was come, and all the summer world was bright and fresh, and brimming with life. There was a song in every heart; and if the heart was young the music issued at the lips. There was cheer in every face and a spring in every step. The locust trees were in bloom and the fragrance of the blossoms filled the air. Cardiff Hill, beyond the village and above it, was green with vegetation and it lay just far enough away to seem a Delectable Land, dreamy, reposeful, and inviting.

星期六的早晨到了，夏天的世界，阳光明媚、空气新鲜、生机盎然。每个人的心中都荡漾着一首歌，而年轻人情不自禁地将心中的歌唱了出来。每个人的脸上都洋溢着欢乐，每个人的脚步都是那么轻盈。洋槐树花意正浓，空气里弥漫着芬芳的花香。村庄外面高高的卡第夫山上覆盖着绿色的植被，这山离村子的距离正好让它看起来就像一块“乐土”，充满梦幻、宁静安详、令人神往。

Tom appeared on the sidewalk with a bucket of whitewash and a long—handled brush. He surveyed the fence, and all gladness left him and a deep melancholy settled down upon his spirit. Thirty yards of board fence nine feet high. Life to him seemed hollow, and existence but a burden. Sighing, he dipped his brush and passed it along the topmost plank; repeated the operation; did it again; compared the insignificant whitewashed streak with the far—reaching continent of unwhitewashed fence, and sat down on a tree—box discouraged. Jim came skipping out at the gate with a tin pail, and singing "Buffalo Gals." Bringing water from the town pump had always been hateful work in Tom's eyes, before, but now it did not strike him so. He remembered that there was company at the pump. White, mulatto, and Negro boys and girls were always there waiting their turns, resting, trading playthings, quarreling, fighting, skylarking. And he remembered that although the pump was only a hundred and fifty yards off, Jim never got back with a bucket of water under an hour — and even then somebody generally had to go after him. Tom said:

汤姆出现在人行道上，一只手拎着一桶石灰水，另一只手拿着一把长柄刷子。他仔细看了看栅栏，一点高兴劲儿都没了，一股深切的惆怅涌上心头。栅栏可是三十码长，九英尺高啊。生活对他来说太乏味空洞了，活着仅仅是一种负担。他叹着气，把刷子蘸上石灰水，沿着最顶上一层木板刷起来。接着又刷了一下，两下。看看刚刷过的不起眼的那块，再和那望不到边的一大片还没刷的栅栏相比，汤姆一屁股坐在了一个木箱子上，垂头丧气。这时，吉姆手里提着一个锡皮桶，嘴中唱着“布法罗的女娃们”蹦蹦跳跳地从大门口跑出来。在汤姆眼中，到镇上从抽水机那里拎水回来，一向是件令人厌烦的差事，现在他可不这样看了。他记得在那里有很多伴儿。有白人孩子、混血孩子还有黑人孩子，都在那排队等着提水。大家在那儿休息，交换各自玩的东西，吵吵闹闹，打斗嬉戏。而且他还记得尽管他们家离拎水处只有一百五十码左右，可是吉姆从没有在一个小时里拎回一桶水来——有时甚至还得别人去催才行。汤姆说：

"Say, Jim, I'll fetch the water if you'll whitewash some."

“喂，吉姆，你来刷刷墙吧，我去提水。”

Jim shook his head and said:

吉姆摇摇头，说：

"Can't, Mars Tom. Ole missis, she tole me I got to go an' git dis water an' not stop foolin' roun' wid anybody. She say she spec' Mars Tom gwine to ax me to whitewash, an' so she tole me go 'long an' 'tend to my own business — she 'lowed she'd 'tend to de whitewashin'."

“不行，汤姆少爷。老太太，她叫我去提水，不准在路上停下来和人家玩。她说她猜到汤姆少爷你会让我刷墙，所以她吩咐我只管干自己的活——她说她要亲自来看看你刷墙。”

"Oh, never you mind what she said, Jim. That's the way she always talks. Gimme the bucket — I won't be gone only a minute. She won't ever know."

“哎，你别管她对你说的那一套，吉姆。她总是这样说的。把水桶给我——我马上就回来。她才不会知道呢。”

"Oh, I dasn't, Mars Tom. Ole missis she'd take an' tar de head off 'n me. Deed she would."

“哦，不，我可不敢，汤姆少爷。老太太她会把我的头给拧下来的，她真的会的！”

"She! She never licks anybody — whacks 'em over the head with her thimble — and who cares for that, I'd like to know. She talks awful, but talk don't hurt — anyways it don't if she don't cry. Jim, I'll give you a marvel. I'll give you a white alley!"

“她！她从来没揍过任何人——她不过是用顶针在头上敲敲罢了——谁还在乎这个啊，我倒想问问。她不过是嘴上说得凶，可是说说又没什么事——反正只要她不大叫大嚷就没事。吉姆，我给你一个好玩意，给你一个白石头子儿！”

Jim began to waver.

吉姆开始动摇了。

"White alley, Jim! And it's a bully taw."

“白石头子啊，吉姆！这可是真正好玩的石头子啊。”

"My! Dat's a mighty gay marvel, I tell you! But Mars Tom I's powerful 'fraid ole missis —"

“嘿！老实说，那是个挺不错的好玩意。可是汤姆少爷，我太害怕老太太了……”

"And besides, if you will I'll show you my sore toe."

“还有，吉姆，只要你答应，我还给你看我那只肿痛的脚趾头。”

Jim was only human — this attraction was too much for him. He put down his pail, took the white alley, and bent over the toe with absorbing interest while the bandage was being unwound. In another moment he was flying down the street with his pail and a tingling rear, Tom was whitewashing with vigor, and Aunt Polly was retiring from the field with a slipper in her hand and triumph in her eye.

吉姆只是个凡人——这诱惑对他太大了。他放下水桶，接过白石头子儿，弯着腰饶有兴趣地看汤姆解开绷带，露出那只肿痛的脚趾。过了一会儿，吉姆拎着水桶飞快地沿着街道跑掉了，感觉屁股后面火烧火燎的。汤姆继续玩命刷墙，而波莉姨妈此时从田地干活回来了，正手里拎着一只拖鞋，眼里流露出得意洋洋的神色。

But Tom's energy did not last. He began to think of the fun he had planned for this day, and his sorrows multiplied. Soon the free boys would come tripping along on all sorts of delicious expeditions, and they would make a world of fun of him for having to work — the very thought of it burnt him like fire. He got out his worldly wealth and examined it — bits of toys, marbles, and trash; enough to buy an exchange of work, maybe, but not half enough to buy so much as half an hour of pure freedom. So he returned his straitened means to his pocket, and gave up the idea of trying to buy the boys. At this dark and hopeless moment an inspiration burst upon him! Nothing less than a great, magnificent inspiration.

不过，汤姆的干劲儿没持续多久。他开始想起原先为这天做的有意思的安排，心里越来越难受。再过一会儿，那些自由自在的男孩子们就会蹦蹦跳跳地跑过来，玩各种各样好玩儿的游戏，他们看到他不得不刷墙干活，会笑掉大牙的——想到这，汤姆感觉像火烧似的难受。他拿出他全部的家当，仔细地看了一阵——有残缺不全的玩具、一些石头子，还有一些没有什么用处的东西。也许这些玩意足够用来让别的孩子为自己干活，不过，要想换来半个小时的绝对自由，连一半都不够呢。于是他又把这几件破玩意装进口袋，打消了用这些来收买那些男孩子的念头。正在这灰心绝望的时刻，他忽然灵机一动，计上心来。绝对是个聪明绝伦，奇妙无比的主意。

He took up his brush and went tranquilly to work. Ben Rogers hove in sight presently — the very boy, of all boys, whose ridicule he had been dreading. Ben's gait was the hop—skip—and—jump — proof enough that his heart was light and his anticipations high. He was eating an apple, and giving a long, melodious whoop, at intervals, followed by a deep—toned ding—dong—dong, ding—dong—dong, for he was personating a steamboat. As he drew near, he slackened speed, took the middle of the street, leaned far over to star—board and rounded to ponderously and with laborious pomp and circumstance — for he was personating the Big Missouri, and considered himself to be drawing nine feet of water. He was boat and captain and engine bells combined, so he had to imagine himself standing on his own hurricane deck giving the orders and executing them:

他拿起刷子，继续一声不响地干了起来。不一会儿，本·罗杰斯出现了——在所有的孩子当中，这个男孩的讥讽嘲弄最叫汤姆害怕。本走路好像在三级跳一样——足以证明他心情轻松愉快，而且还打算大干一番什么事。他正在吃苹果，不时地发出长长的、悦耳的“呜——”声，隔会儿还发出“叮当当、叮当当”低沉的声音，他这是在扮演一只蒸汽轮船。当越来越近时，他减慢了速度，走到街中心，身体倾向右舷，费九牛二虎之力转了船头让船逆风停下——他在扮演“大密苏里号”，好像已吃水九英尺深。他既当船，又当船长还要当轮机铃。因此他就得想象着自己站在自己的顶层甲板上发号施令，同时还执行着这些命令：

"Stop her, sir! Ting—a—ling—ling!" The headway ran almost out, and he drew up slowly toward the sidewalk.

“停船，伙计！叮——啊铃铃！”船几乎停稳了，他又慢慢地向人行道靠过来。

"Ship up to back! Ting—a—ling—ling!" His arms straightened and stiffened down his sides.

“调转船头！叮——啊铃——铃！”他伸直了胳臂，用力笔直地垂在身体两侧。

"Set her back on the stabboard! Ting—a—ling—ling! Chow! ch—chow—wow! Chow!" His right hand, meantime, describing stately circles — for it was representing a forty—foot wheel.

“右舷后退！叮——啊铃——铃！嚓呜——嚓——嚓呜！嚓呜！”这时候他的右手比划着大圆圈——这代表着一个四十英尺的转轮。

"Let her go back on the labboard! Ting—a—ling—ling! Chow—ch—chow—chow!" The left hand began to describe circles.

“左舷后退！叮——啊铃——铃！嚓呜——嚓——嚓呜——嚓呜！”左手开始画圈。

"Stop the stabboard! Ting—a—ling—ling! Stop the labboard! Come ahead on the stabboard! Stop her! Let your outside turn over slow! Ting—a—ling—ling! Chow—owow! Get out that head—line! Lively now! Come — out with your spring—line — what're you about there! Take a turn round that stump with the bight of it! Stand by that stage, now — let her go! Done with the engines, sir! Ting—a—ling—ling! Sh't! s'h't! sh't!" (trying the gaugecocks).

“右舷停！叮——啊铃——铃！左舷停！右舷前进！停！外面慢慢转过来！叮——啊铃——铃！嚓——呜——呜！把船头的绳索拿过来！快点！快点——再把船边的绳索递过来——你在那儿愣什么神儿呢！用绳头圈儿绕船桩子一圈！就这么拉紧——放手吧！发动机熄火，伙计！叮——啊铃——铃！希特——希特——希特！”（模仿着汽门排气的声音。）

Tom went on whitewashing — paid no attention to the steamboat. Ben stared a moment and then said: "Hi—yi! You're up a stump, ain't you?"

汤姆继续刷栅栏——对那只蒸汽轮船不理不睬，本瞪着眼睛看了一会儿，说： “哎呀，混得挺好了，是不是？”

No answer. Tom surveyed his last touch with the eye of an artist, then he gave his brush another gentle sweep and surveyed the result, as before. Ben ranged up alongside of him. Tom's mouth watered for the apple, but he stuck to his work. Ben said:

汤姆没吭声。他用艺术家的眼光审视他最后刷的那一块，接着轻轻地刷了一下，又像刚才那样打量着。本走到汤姆身旁。看见那苹果，汤姆馋得直流口水，可是还是继续刷他的墙。本说：

"Hello, old chap, you got to work, hey?"

“嘿，老伙计，干活呢，嗯？”

Tom wheeled suddenly and said:

汤姆突然转过身来说道：

"Why, it's you, Ben! I warn't noticing."

“咳！是你呀，本！我刚才没注意。”

"Say — I'm going in a—swimming, I am. Don't you wish you could? But of course you'd druther work — wouldn't you? Course you would!"

“喂，我要游泳去了，我可去了啊。你不想去吗？当然啦，你宁愿在这儿干活，对吧？你当然情愿啦！”

Tom contemplated the boy a bit, and said:

汤姆打量了一下那男孩，说：

"What do you call work?"

“你说什么？这叫干活？”

"Why, ain't that work?"

“这还不叫干活吗？”

Tom resumed his whitewashing, and answered carelessly:

汤姆重新又开始刷墙，漫不经心地说：

"Well, maybe it is, and maybe it ain't. All I know, is, it suits Tom Sawyer."

“这也许是干活，也许不是。我只知道这很合汤姆·索亚的胃口。”

"Oh come, now, you don't mean to let on that you like it?"

“哦，得了吧！难道你的意思是说你喜欢干这事？”

The brush continued to move.

刷子还在不停地刷着。

"Like it? Well, I don't see why I oughtn't to like it. Does a boy get a chance to whitewash a fence every day?"

“喜欢干？哎，我不明白为什么我会不喜欢干。哪个男孩子能天天有机会刷墙？”

That put the thing in a new light. Ben stopped nibbling his apple. Tom swept his brush daintily back and forth — stepped back to note the effect — added a touch here and there — criticized the effect again — Ben watching every move and getting more and more interested, more and more absorbed. Presently he said:

这事倒是挺新鲜的。本不再啃苹果了。汤姆灵巧地用刷子来回来去地刷着——不时地停下来退后几步看看效果——在这补一刷子，在那补一刷子——然后再打量一下效果——本目不转睛地看着汤姆的一举一动，越看越有兴趣，越看越被吸引住了。不一会儿他说：

"Say, Tom, let me whitewash a little."

“喂，汤姆，让我也刷点。”

Tom considered, was about to consent; but he altered his mind:

汤姆想了一下，正打算答应他，可是他又改变了主意：

"No — no — I reckon it wouldn't hardly do, Ben. You see, Aunt Polly's awful particular about this fence — right here on the street, you know — but if it was the back fence I wouldn't mind and she wouldn't. Yes, she's awful particular about this fence; it's got to be done very careful; I reckon there ain't one boy in a thousand, maybe two thousand, that can do it the way it's got to be done."

“不——不行，本——我想这可能够呛。要知道，波莉姨妈对这栅栏相当讲究——这可是当街的一面呀——不过要是后面的，你刷刷倒也没什么，姨妈也不会在乎的。是呀，她对这道栅栏相当讲究的。刷这墙一定得特别精心。我想在一千个，也许在两千个孩子里，也找不出一个能按波莉姨妈的要求刷好这道墙的。”

"No — is that so? Oh come, now — lemme just try. Only just a little — I'd let you, if you was me, Tom."

“哦，是吗？哎，就让我试一试吧。我只刷一点——如果我是你的话，我就会答应的，汤姆。”

"Ben, I'd like to, honest injun; but Aunt Polly — well, Jim wanted to do it, but she wouldn't let him; Sid wanted to do it, and she wouldn't let Sid. Now don't you see how I'm fixed? If you was to tackle this fence and anything was to happen to it —"

“本，我倒是愿意，真的。可是，波莉姨妈——唉，吉姆想刷，可她不让，希德也想干，她也不让希德干。现在你看我有多为难？要是你来摆弄这墙，万一出了什么事儿……”

"Oh, shucks, I'll be just as careful. Now lemme try. Say — I'll give you the core of my apple."

“啊，没事，我会小心的。让我试试吧。嘿——我把苹果核给你。”

"Well, here — No, Ben, now don't. I'm afeard —"

“唉，那个……不行，本，算了吧。我就怕——”

"I'll give you all of it!"

“我把这苹果全给你！”

Tom gave up the brush with reluctance in his face, but alacrity in his heart. And while the late steamer Big Missouri worked and sweated in the sun, the retired artist sat on a barrel in the shade close by, dangled his legs, munched his apple, and planned the slaughter of more innocents. There was no lack of material; boys happened along every little while; they came to jeer, but remained to whitewash. By the time Ben was fagged out, Tom had traded the next chance to Billy Fisher for a kite, in good repair; and when he played out, Johnny Miller bought in for a dead rat and a string to swing it with — and so on, and so on, hour after hour. And when the middle of the afternoon came, from being a poor poverty—stricken boy in the morning, Tom was literally rolling in wealth. He had besides the things before mentioned, twelve marbles, part of a jew's—harp, a piece of blue bottle glass to look through, a spool cannon, a key that wouldn't unlock anything, a fragment of chalk, a glass stopper of a decanter, a tin soldier, a couple of tadpoles, six firecrackers, a kitten with only one eye, a brass doorknob, a dog collar — but no dog — the handle of a knife, four pieces of orange peel, and a dilapidated old window sash.

汤姆把刷子让给本，脸上摆出一副不情愿，可心里却巴不得呢。当刚才那只“大密苏里号”在大太阳底下干活，累得大汗淋漓的时候，这位退了休的艺术家却在附近的阴凉下，坐在一只木桶上，晃悠着腿，一边大口大口地吃着苹果，一边算计着怎么再宰更多的傻瓜。这样的傻瓜可不少。每过一会儿，就有些男孩子路过。起先他们都想来开开玩笑，结果都留下来刷栅栏了。在本累得筋疲力尽时，汤姆早已经和比利·费施做好了交易。比利用一个修得很好的风筝换来接替本的机会。等到比利也玩得差不多的时候，詹尼·米勒用一只死老鼠和拴着它的小绳子购买了这个特权——一个又一个的傻小子受骗上了当，好几个钟头都是如此。下午快过了一半的时候，汤姆早上还是个穷困潦倒的穷小子，现在实际上已经富得流油了。除了刚才提到的那些玩意儿，还有十二颗石头子、一段儿破口琴、一块透明的蓝玻璃片、一门线轴做的大炮、一把什么锁也不开的钥匙、一截粉笔、一个大酒瓶塞子、一个锡皮做的小兵、一对蝌蚪、六个鞭炮、一只独眼小猫、一个门上的铜把手、一根拴狗的颈圈——却没有狗——一个刀把、四片桔子皮，还有一个破烂的窗框。

He had had a nice, good, idle time all the while — plenty of company — and the fence had three coats of whitewash on it! If he hadn't run out of whitewash he would have bankrupted every boy in the village.

他一直舒舒服服，悠闲自在——同伴很多——而且栅栏整整被刷了三遍。要不是他的石灰水用光了的话，他会让村里的每个孩子都掏空腰包破产的。

Tom said to himself that it was not such a hollow world, after all. He had discovered a great law of human action, without knowing it — namely, that in order to make a man or a boy covet a thing, it is only necessary to make the thing difficult to attain. If he had been a great and wise philosopher, like the writer of this book, he would now have comprehended that Work consists of whatever a body is obliged to do, and that Play consists of whatever a body is not obliged to do. And this would help him to understand why constructing artificial flowers or performing on a treadmill is work, while rolling tenpins or climbing Mont Blanc is only amusement. There are wealthy gentlemen in England who drive four—horse passenger coaches twenty or thirty miles on a daily line, in the summer, because the privilege costs them considerable money; but if they were offered wages for the service, that would turn it into work and then they would resign.

汤姆自言自语道，这世界原来并不是那么空洞乏味啊。他已经不知不觉地发现了人类行为的一大法则——那就是为了让一个大人或一个小孩渴望干什么事，只需设法将这事变得难以到手就行了。如果他像这本书的作者一样是位伟大而睿智的哲学家，他就会懂得所谓“工作”就是一个人被迫要干的事情，至于“玩”就是一个人没有义务要干的事。这个道理使他明白了为什么做假花和表演蹬车轮就算是工作，而玩十柱戏和爬勃朗峰就算是娱乐。英国有钱的绅士在夏季每天驾着四轮马拉客车沿着同样的路线走上二三十英里，他们为这种特权竟花了大把钱。可是如果付钱让他们载客，那就把这桩事情变成了工作，他们就会撒手不干了。

The boy mused a while over the substantial change which had taken place in his worldly circumstances, and then wended toward headquarters to report.

汤姆想了会儿那天发生在他身边的天翻地覆的变化，然后就到司令部报告去了。





Chapter 3


第三章

TOM presented himself before Aunt Polly, who was sitting by an open window in a pleasant rearward apartment, which was bedroom, breakfast room, dining room, and library, combined. The balmy summer air, the restful quiet, the odor of the flowers, and the drowsing murmur of the bees had had their effect, and she was nodding over her knitting — for she had no company but the cat, and it was asleep in her lap. Her spectacles were propped up on her gray head for safety. She had thought that of course Tom had deserted long ago, and she wondered at seeing him place himself in her power again in this intrepid way. He said: "Mayn't I go and play now, aunt?"

汤姆来到波莉姨妈面前，她正坐在舒适的后面房间里一个敞开的窗户旁。这间房既是卧室、又是餐厅，还是图书馆。夏日温和的空气、恬恬的静谧、花朵的芬芳、还有催人入睡的蜜蜂的嗡嗡声，都已经施展了效力。姨妈正拿着针织物打着盹——因为她除了猫没有伴儿，而猫在她膝上睡着了。她把眼镜架在了灰白的头顶上，以防被打碎。她原以为汤姆肯定早就扔下活儿溜去玩了，现在看见他站在自己面前，没有害怕的意思，吃了一惊。他说：“我现在可以去玩了吗？姨妈。”

"What, a'ready? How much have you done?"

“嗯？刷好了？你刷了多少啊？”

"It's all done, aunt."

“都刷好了，姨妈。”

"Tom, don't lie to me — I can't bear it."

“汤姆，别跟我撒谎啊——我可受不了。”

"I ain't, aunt; it is all done."

“我没撒谎，姨妈。确实都刷好了。”

Aunt Polly placed small trust in such evidence. She went out to see for herself; and she would have been content to find twenty per cent of Tom's statement true. When she found the entire fence whitewashed, and not only whitewashed but elaborately coated and recoated, and even a streak added to the ground, her astonishment was almost unspeakable. She said:

波莉姨妈不怎么相信他的话。她要自己出去看看。要是汤姆说的话有百分之二十是真的，她就心满意足了。她发现整个栅栏都已刷过了，不仅刷了而且是特意刷了一层又一层，甚至连地上还抹了一条，她简直惊讶得目瞪口呆。她说：

"Well, I never! There's no getting round it, you can work when you're a mind to, Tom." And then she diluted the compliment by adding, "But it's powerful seldom you're a mind to, I'm bound to say. Well, go 'long and play; but mind you get back some time in a week, or I'll tan you."

“哎，怪了！真是不可思议！你想干的时候还是挺能干的啊，汤姆。”然后又加了一句，把刚才的表扬淡化了一下，“可你想干的时候实在是太少了，我不得不说。行了，玩儿去吧。不过到点就回来啊，不然我揍你一顿。”

She was so overcome by the splendor of his achievement that she took him into the closet and selected a choice apple and delivered it to him, along with an improving lecture upon the added value and flavor a treat took to itself when it came without sin through virtuous effort. And while she closed with a happy Scriptural flourish, he "hooked" a doughnut.

她因为汤姆的工作成果而喜出望外，就把他带到储藏室，挑了一个又大又好的苹果递给了他。同时还更进一步地教育他，如果款待不是通过歪门邪道，而是通过自己的努力得来的，那就格外有价值和意味。在她用一句《圣经》里的妙语格言作结尾的时候，汤姆“顺”了个油炸面圈。

Then he skipped out, and saw Sid just starting up the outside stairway that led to the back rooms on the second floor. Clods were handy and the air was full of them in a twinkling. They raged around Sid like a hailstorm; and before Aunt Polly could collect her surprised faculties and sally to the rescue, six or seven clods had taken personal effect, and Tom was over the fence and gone. There was a gate, but as a general thing he was too crowded for time to make use of it. His soul was at peace, now that he had settled with Sid for calling attention to his black thread and getting him into trouble.

随后，他蹦蹦跳跳地跑了出来，看见希德正爬上通向二楼后面房间的楼梯。满地的泥块儿唾手可得，汤姆便捡起大把朝希德扔过去，一眨眼的工夫满天飞的全是。泥块儿像冰雹似的落在希德周围。波莉姨妈还没有来得及定定神儿，跑过来解围，就已经有六七块泥土打中了希德，而汤姆早就翻过栅栏撒丫子跑了。栅栏上有大门，可是一般来说汤姆急着要出去，没有时间从门那里走。他现在心里好受多了。希德让波莉姨妈注意到自己的黑线，让自己有了麻烦，现在跟希德算完了账。

Tom skirted the block, and came round into a muddy alley that led by the back of his aunt's cow stable. He presently got safely beyond the reach of capture and punishment, and hastened toward the public square of the village, where two "military" companies of boys had met for conflict, according to previous appointment. Tom was General of one of these armies, Joe Harper (a bosom friend) General of the other. These two great commanders did not condescend to fight in person — that being better suited to the still smaller fry — but sat together on an eminence and conducted the field operations by orders delivered through aides-de-camp. Tom's army won a great victory, after a long and hardfought battle. Then the dead were counted, prisoners exchanged, the terms of the next disagreement agreed upon, and the day for the necessary battle appointed; after which the armies fell into line and marched away, and Tom turned homeward alone.

汤姆绕过那一排房子，来到靠着他姨妈牛圈后面的一条泥泞巷子里。他很快就完全地溜到抓不到也罚不着他的地方，急急忙忙赶到村里那块公共场地。这儿两支由孩子们组成的“军队”按事先的约定已集合起来，准备打仗。汤姆是其中一支部队的将军，他的知心好友乔·哈帕则率领另一支队伍。这两位总指挥不屑于亲自战斗——那更适合手下的军官战士去——而他们却一起坐在一块高地上，通过他们的随从副官发号施令，指挥打仗。经过一番长时间的艰苦奋战，汤姆的部队取得了辉煌的胜利。然后双方清点了死亡人数，交换了战俘，谈妥了下次交战条件，还约定好作战日期。于是双方部队先列好队形，迈步离开了战场，而汤姆也就独自回家了。

As he was passing by the house where Jeff Thatcher lived, he saw a new girl in the garden — a lovely little blue-eyed creature with yellow hair plaited into two long tails, white summer frock and embroidered pantalettes. The fresh-crowned hero fell without firing a shot. A certain Amy Lawrence vanished out of his heart and left not even a memory of herself behind. He had thought he loved her to distraction; he had regarded his passion as adoration; and behold it was only a poor little evanescent partiality. He had been months winning her; she had confessed hardly a week ago; he had been the happiest and the proudest boy in the world only seven short days, and here in one instant of time she had gone out of his heart like a casual stranger whose visit is done.

他走过杰夫·撒切尔家住的房子的时候，看见有一个新来的女孩子站在花园里——一个漂亮可爱的蓝眼睛的小姑娘。金黄色的头发梳成两只长长的发辫，穿着白色的夏装和刺绣的长裤。这位刚戴上胜利花冠的战斗英雄一枪没打就束手投降了。那个叫艾美·劳伦斯的姑娘立刻从他的心目中消失了而且消失得无影无踪。他原以为他爱她爱得神魂颠倒，而且把他的感情当作深情的爱慕，可在别人看来只不过是可怜渺小、昙花一现的爱恋罢了。他费了好几个月的工夫才赢得她的芳心，她答应也不过不到一周。他在短短七天之内做了一次世界上最幸福、最自豪的男孩儿。可现在刹那间，她就像一位拜访完毕的过客一样，被他全忘在脑后了。

He worshipped this new angel with furtive eye, till he saw that she had discovered him; then he pretended he did not know she was present, and began to "show off " in all sorts of absurd boyish ways, in order to win her admiration. He kept up this grotesque foolishness for some time; but by and by, while he was in the midst of some dangerous gymnastic performances, he glanced aside and saw that the little girl was wending her way toward the house. Tom came up to the fence and leaned on it, grieving, and hoping she would tarry yet a while longer. She halted a moment on the steps and then moved toward the door. Tom heaved a great sigh as she put her foot on the threshold. But his face lit up, right away, for she tossed a pansy over the fence a moment before she disappeared.

他爱慕着这位新来的天使并偷眼看她，直到看见她发现了自己，他便装做不知道她在的样子，开始用各种滑稽的男孩子气的方式“显摆”自己，为的是赢得她的好感。他傻乎乎地耍弄一阵子，然后一边做惊险的体操动作，一边往旁边瞟了一下，见那小姑娘正朝房子走去。汤姆走过去靠在栅栏上伤心极了，希望她再多呆一会儿。她在台阶上停了一会儿，然后朝门口走去。当她踏上门槛的时候，汤姆长叹了一声。可是他又立刻喜上眉梢，因为她进去之前往栅栏外面扔了一朵三色紫罗兰花。

The boy ran around and stopped within a foot or two of the flower, and then shaded his eyes with his hand and began to look down the street as if he had discovered something of interest going on in that direction. Presently he picked up a straw and began trying to balance it on his nose, with his head tilted far back; and as he moved from side to side, in his efforts, he edged nearer and nearer toward the pansy; finally his bare foot rested upon it, his pliant toes closed upon it, and he hopped away with the treasure and disappeared round the corner. But only for a minute — only while he could button the flower inside his jacket, next to his heart — or next to his stomach, possibly, for he was not much posted in anatomy, and not hypercritical, anyway.

汤姆跑了过去，在离花一两英尺的地方停住了，然后把手罩在眼睛上朝街上看过去，好像注意到在那边正发生什么有意思的事。然后他捡起一根稻草放在鼻子上，头使劲向后仰着，极力让稻草保持平衡。他费力地左右移动着，一点点侧着身子靠近那朵花，终于他的光脚丫踩在了上面，又用脚趾头灵巧地抓住了它，然后带着他心爱的宝贝跑开了，在转弯处消失得无影无踪。可是很快他就把花别在了上衣里就贴着心脏的地方——或者说贴近胃部的地方——可能吧，他不太懂解剖学，反正他也无所谓。

He returned, now, and hung about the fence till nightfall, "showing off," as before; but the girl never exhibited herself again, though Tom comforted himself a little with the hope that she had been near some window, meantime, and been aware of his attentions. Finally he strode home reluctantly, with his poor head full of visions.

他现在又回到了老地方，逗留在栅栏附近直到天黑，像之前那样“显摆”，可是那女孩再也没出来。汤姆用一点希望来安慰自己，希望她一直在窗子附近，而且注意到了他这番殷勤。最后，他终于不情愿地朝家走去，他那可怜的脑瓜子里满是幻想。

All through supper his spirits were so high that his aunt wondered "what had got into the child." He took a good scolding about clodding Sid, and did not seem to mind it in the least. He tried to steal sugar under his aunt's very nose, and got his knuckles rapped for it. He said:

整个吃晚饭的时间他异常兴奋。他姨妈不禁感到有些纳闷：“这孩子怎么了？”因为拿泥块砸希德的事，他挨了一顿臭骂，不过，对此他倒满不在乎。他就在姨妈的眼皮底下偷糖吃，结果遭了一顿训。他说：

"Aunt, you don't whack Sid when he takes it."

“姨妈，希德拿糖吃的时候，您怎么不打他呀。”

"Well, Sid don't torment a body the way you do. You'd be always into that sugar if I warn't watching you."

“噢，希德可不像你这样让人不省心。我要是看得不紧，你恨不得钻到糖堆里不出来。”

Presently she stepped into the kitchen, and Sid, happy in his immunity, reached for the sugar bowl — a sort of glorying over Tom which was wellnigh unbearable. But Sid's fingers slipped and the bowl dropped and broke. Tom was in ecstasies. In such ecstasies that he even controlled his tongue and was silent. He said to himself that he would not speak a word, even when his aunt came in, but would sit perfectly still till she asked who did the mischief; and then he would tell, and there would be nothing so good in the world as to see that pet model "catch it." He was so brimful of exultation that he could hardly hold himself when the old lady came back and stood above the wreck discharging lightnings of wrath from over her spectacles. He said to himself, "Now it's coming!" And the next instant he was sprawling on the floor! The potent palm was uplifted to strike again when Tom cried out:

过了一会她就去厨房了。希德因为有了姨妈的庇护，得意极了，伸手去拿糖罐——这是故意对汤姆表现荣耀的举动，这可让汤姆难受极了。可是，希德手一滑，糖罐子掉到地上摔碎了。汤姆简直高兴死了。可再怎么高兴，他还是闭着嘴，一言不发。他心想自己什么都不会说的，甚至是姨妈进来的时候，他就要这么静静地端坐着，等着姨妈问谁闯的祸再揭发，看那个模范“宠儿”吃苦头，那真是世界上让人最开心的事了。当老太太走进来，站在那儿望着地上破碎的罐子，从眼镜上方迸射出愤怒的火花，他真是满心欢喜，几乎按捺不住了。他自言自语道：“好戏马上开始了！”可真想不到，马上他就趴在地上了！那只有力的巴掌举起来正要再打他时，汤姆忍不住大声叫起来：

"Hold on, now, what 'er you belting me for? — Sid broke it!"

“住手啊，你凭什么这么狠打我？——是希德打碎了糖罐！”

Aunt Polly paused, perplexed, and Tom looked for healing pity. But when she got her tongue again, she only said:

波莉姨妈住了手，愣了一会儿，汤姆指望她会讲些好话哄哄他。可她张开嘴只说道：

"Umf! Well, you didn't get a lick amiss, I reckon. You been into some other audacious mischief when I wasn't around, like enough."

“唉！我觉得你挨揍也没什么错。我不在的时候，说不定你又放肆干出什么坏事了。”

Then her conscience reproached her, and she yearned to say something kind and loving; but she judged that this would be construed into a confession that she had been in the wrong, and discipline forbade that. So she kept silence, and went about her affairs with a troubled heart. Tom sulked in a corner and exalted his woes. He knew that in her heart his aunt was on her knees to him, and he was morosely gratified by the consciousness of it. He would hang out no signals, he would take notice of none. He knew that a yearning glance fell upon him, now and then, through a film of tears, but he refused recognition of it. He pictured himself lying sick unto death and his aunt bending over him beseeching one little forgiving word, but he would turn his face to the wall, and die with that word unsaid. Ah, how would she feel then? And he pictured himself brought home from the river, dead, with his curls all wet, and his sore heart at rest. How she would throw herself upon him, and how her tears would fall like rain, and her lips pray God to give her back her boy and she would never, never abuse him any more! But he would lie there cold and white and make no sign — a poor little sufferer, whose griefs were at an end. He so worked upon his feelings with the pathos of these dreams, that he had to keep swallowing, he was so like to choke; and his eyes swam in a blur of water, which overflowed when he winked, and ran down and trickled from the end of his nose. And such a luxury to him was this petting of his sorrows, that he could not bear to have any worldly cheeriness or any grating delight intrude upon it; it was too sacred for such contact; and so, presently, when his cousin Mary danced in, all alive with the joy of seeing home again after an age-long visit of one week to the country, he got up and moved in clouds and darkness out at one door as she brought song and sunshine in at the other.

然后她良心上过不去了，想说几句和声和气的安慰话，可她一想，这样就会让汤姆理解成自己承认错了，这可是规矩所不容的。所以她就一声不吭，忙自己的事去了，可心里头不安得很。汤姆坐在角落处生着闷气，心里越想越难受。他知道姨妈心里想请求自己原谅他，虽然心里闷闷不乐，可想到这个还是挺满足。他不会有任何求和的表示，什么也不会理睬。他知道姨妈时不时地透过朦胧的泪眼，心怀渴望地向他望一眼，可他偏不肯表示他看出来了。他想象着自己躺在那儿病了，快要不行了，他姨妈俯身弯腰看着他，恳求他讲一两句原谅她的话，可是他转过脸去冲着墙，话没说出来就死去了。啊，那时她会觉得怎么样呢？他又想象着自己淹死了，被人从河里捞起抬回家来，头上的小卷发都湿透了，他那伤透了的心得到了安息。她会多么伤心地扑到他身上，眼泪雨点般地落下来，嘴里不住地祈求上帝把她的孩子还给她，保证将永远、永远不再虐待他了！但是，他却躺在那里浑身冰凉，脸色惨白，一动不动——一个可怜虫，受尽苦难，他的悲痛总算终结了。越幻想他就越伤心，他只能把泪水往肚子里咽，都快噎住了。泪水模糊了他的眼睛，只要眼睛一眨就会淌出来，顺着鼻尖掉了下来。他从这种悲伤中获得了无限的安慰和快意，所以绝不能忍受有什么庸俗的愉快或者无聊的欢乐来搅乱他的心境。因为他这种快慰圣洁高尚，不能遭到玷污。所以，不一会当他的表姐玛丽手舞足蹈地跑进来的时候，他马上就避开了。玛丽到乡下去作客，只住了一星期，可好像时隔三秋了似的，现在又看到自己的家高兴极了。她唱着歌欢快地从一扇门走进来的时候，汤姆却站起身来躲进阴云暗影从另一扇门溜出去了。

He wandered far from the accustomed haunts of boys, and sought desolate places that were in harmony with his spirit. A log raft in the river invited him, and he seated himself on its outer edge and contemplated the dreary vastness of the stream, wishing, the while, that he could only be drowned, all at once and unconsciously, without undergoing the uncomfortable routine devised by nature. Then he thought of his flower. He got it out, rumpled and wilted, and it mightily increased his dismal felicity. He wondered if she would pity him if she knew? Would she cry, and wish that she had a right to put her arms around his neck and comfort him? Or would she turn coldly away like all the hollow world? This picture brought such an agony of pleasurable suffering that he worked it over and over again in his mind and set it up in new and varied lights, till he wore it threadbare. At last he rose up sighing and departed in the darkness.

他避开平常男孩子们经常出没的地方，专找僻静的地方，跟他的心境相符。河里的一条木筏吸引了他，于是，他就在木筏的最外边坐下来，凝视着那单调开阔的河面，同时又希望自己不经过老天安排的那番痛苦的过程，就一下子毫无知觉地淹死。这时，他想起了那朵花。他拿出了那朵花，已经皱皱巴巴打蔫儿了，这更让他觉得更凄凉，也更幸福。他琢磨着，如果她知道了这件事，会不会同情他呢？她会哭吗？会巴不得想抱住他的脖子安慰他吗？还是，她会像这个空洞乏味的世界一样，冷漠地转头离开呢？这种想象让他痛并快乐着。他就在脑海里反反复复多角度地想象着，直到索然无味为止。最后，他叹着气站了起来，在黑暗中离开了。

About half past nine or ten o'clock he came along the deserted street to where the Adored Unknown lived; he paused a moment; no sound fell upon his listening ear; a candle was casting a dull glow upon the curtain of a second-story window. Was the sacred presence there? He climbed the fence, threaded his stealthy way through the plants, till he stood under that window; he looked up at it long, and with emotion; then he laid him down on the ground under it, disposing himself upon his back, with his hands clasped upon his breast and holding his poor wilted flower. And thus he would die — out in the cold world, with no shelter over his homeless head, no friendly hand to wipe the deathdamps from his brow, no loving face to bend pityingly over him when the great agony came. And thus she would see him when she looked out upon the glad morning, and oh! Would she drop one little tear upon his poor, lifeless form, would she heave one little sigh to see a bright young life so rudely blighted, so untimely cut down?

大约在9点半或10点左右，他沿着那条没有人影儿的大街走着，来到那位他“爱慕的无名氏”住的地方。他停下来，竖起耳朵听了一会儿，可什么都没听见。二楼窗户的帘子上映出昏暗的烛光。那个圣洁的小天使在吗？他爬过栅栏，小心地穿过花花草草，一直走到窗子下面。他抬起头，久久地深情地望着窗子，然后仰卧着躺在了窗子下面，两手交叉搭在胸前，捧着那可怜的、已经枯萎了的花。他情愿就这样死去——在这冷酷无情的世界上，当死亡的痛苦来临的时候，他这无家可归的孩子头上没有一丝遮盖，没有亲友来抹去他额上临死前留下的汗珠，也没有慈爱的面孔贴近他来表示惋惜。这样的话她早晨推开窗户，看到明媚的阳光的时候一定会看见他的。哦！她会不会对他那可怜的、已经断了气的身体落下哪怕是一小滴的眼泪呢？看见一位前途无量的年轻的生命就这样无情地被摧残，这样过早地夭折，她会轻微地长叹一声吗？

The window went up, a maidservant's discordant voice profaned the holy calm, and a deluge of water drenched the prone martyr's remains!

这时候窗子打开了，一个女仆刺耳的说话声打破了那圣洁的寂静，然后一股水泼了下来，把这位躺在地上的殉道者的遗体浇得像个落汤鸡！

The strangling hero sprang up with a relieving snort. There was a whiz as of a missile in the air, mingled with the murmur of a curse, a sound as of shivering glass followed, and a small, vague form went over the fence and shot away in the gloom.

这位被水浇得喘不过气来的英雄猛地从地上蹦起来，擤了擤鼻子，舒服了点。随后，只见有个什么东西混杂着嘟囔的咒骂声，像导弹一样嗖的一声在空中划过，接下来就听到一阵打碎玻璃的声音，之后，就见一个小小的、模糊的人影翻过栅栏，在朦胧的夜色中箭一般地跑了。

Not long after, as Tom, all undressed for bed, was surveying his drenched garments by the light of a tallow dip, Sid woke up; but if he had any dim idea of making any "references to allusions," he thought better of it and held his peace, for there was danger in Tom's eye.

不一会儿，汤姆脱光衣服上床睡觉。他正借着蜡烛的光亮看看那被泼得透湿的衣服时，希德醒了。他原本有点幸灾乐祸的想法，想要“指桑骂槐”地说几句俏皮话，可是他还是改变了主意，没有出声，因为他看到汤姆眼睛里含有一股杀机。

Tom turned in without the added vexation of prayers, and Sid made mental note of the omission.

汤姆连睡前祷告也没做就上床就睡觉了，祷告更让他窝火。希德在心里却记下了汤姆偷了一次懒。





Chapter 4


第四章

THE sun rose upon a tranquil world , and beamed down upon the peaceful village like a benediction. Breakfast over, Aunt Polly had family worship: it began with a prayer built from the ground up of solid courses of Scriptural quotations, welded together with a thin mortar of originality; and from the summit of this she delivered a grim chapter of the Mosaic Law, as from Sinai.

太阳升起来，沐浴着这个宁静的世界，像圣光一样照在静静的村庄上。早饭过后，波莉姨妈做了祷告。开始的一篇祷告词完全是从《圣经》中引用来的，中间还掺杂着点自己的创意。两者勉强粘合之后，她庄严地背诵了“摩西律”那章，就像从西奈山顶上宣布的一样。

Then Tom girded up his loins, so to speak, and went to work to "get his verses." Sid had learned his lesson days before. Tom bent all his energies to the memorizing of five verses, and he chose part of the Sermon on the Mount, because he could find no verses that were shorter. At the end of half an hour Tom had a vague general idea of his lesson, but no more, for his mind was traversing the whole field of human thought, and his hands were busy with distracting recreations. Mary took his book to hear him recite, and he tried to find his way through the fog:

然后汤姆打起了精神，一本正经地去背《圣经》的段落去了。希德几天前就把他该背的段落背完了。汤姆费九牛二虎之力背诵《圣经》的五段。他选择的是基督《登山宝训》的一部分，因为他找不出来比这部分更短的了。半个小时过去了，汤姆对背的内容有了个大概的印象了，不过也就这样了，因为他现在已经心不在焉，胡思乱想了，两只手也摆弄着毫不相关的东西。玛丽拿起书要听他背诵，他就努力稀里糊涂地往下蒙着背：

"Blessed are the — a — a —"

“有福的人是……呃——呃——”

"Poor —"

“贫乏者——”

"Yes — poor; blessed are the poor — a — a —"

“对——贫乏者；有福的人是贫乏者……呃——呃——”

"In spirit —"

“精神上——”

"In spirit; blessed are the poor in spirit, for they — they —"

“在精神上；有福的人是精神上的贫乏者，因为他们——他们——”

"Theirs —"

“他们将——”

"For theirs.

“因为他们将。

Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are they that mourn, for they — they —"

有福的人是精神上的贫乏者，因为他们将进天国。有福的人是那些哀恸的人，因为他们——他们——”

"Sh —"

“将——”

"For they — a —"

“因为他们……呃——”

"S, H, A —"

“将——”

"For they S, H — Oh, I don't know what it is!"

“因为他们将——下面我记不得了！”

"Shall!"

“将要——”

"Oh, shall! for they shall — for they shall — a — a — shall mourn — a — a — blessed are they that shall — they that — a — they that shall mourn, for they shall — a — shall what? Why don't you tell me, Mary? — what do you want to be so mean for?"

“哦！将要！因为他们将要——因为他们将要——呃——呃——将要哀恸——呃——呃——被保佑的是那些将要——那些将要——呃——那些将要哀恸的人，因为他们将要——呃——将要什么？玛丽，为什么不提示我？——你干吗要这样小气？”

"Oh, Tom, you poor thickheaded thing, I'm not teasing you. I wouldn't do that. You must go and learn it again. Don't you be discouraged, Tom, you'll manage it — and if you do, I'll give you something ever so nice. There, now, that's a good boy."

“哦，汤姆，你这个笨蛋可怜虫。我可没拿你开心。我不逗你。你必须回去重新背。汤姆，你可别灰心丧气，你能背下来的——如果你背熟了，我会给你好玩儿的。哎，对了，这才是个好孩子。”

"All right! What is it, Mary, tell me what it is."

“好吧！给我什么，玛丽？告诉我是什么好玩的东西。”

"Never you mind, Tom. You know if I say it's nice, it is nice."

“别问啦，汤姆，我说好玩，就是好玩的东西。”

"You bet you that's so, Mary. All right, I'll tackle it again."

“那你可得说话算话，玛丽。那好吧，我就再去好好地背背。”

And he did "tackle it again" — and under the double pressure of curiosity and prospective gain he did it with such spirit that he accomplished a shining success. Mary gave him a brand-new "Barlow" knife worth twelve and a half cents; and the convulsion of delight that swept his system shook him to his foundations. True, the knife would not cut anything, but it was a "sure-enough" Barlow, and there was inconceivable grandeur in that — though where the Western boys ever got the idea that such a weapon could possibly be counterfeited to its injury is an imposing mystery and will always remain so, perhaps. Tom contrived to scarify the cupboard with it, and was arranging to begin on the bureau, when he was called off to dress for Sunday school.

后来他真的“好好地背”了——在好奇心和能有奖品的双重诱惑下，他卖劲儿学了一阵，结果居然大获成功。玛丽给了他一把价值1角2分半的崭新的“巴露牌”小刀。他激动得直发抖，手舞足蹈。没错，这刀什么都切不了，可它是“纯正”的“巴露牌”。这可意味着极大的荣耀——虽然西部的孩子认为这种武器也会有假冒伪劣，会有损它的名誉，但这可是个大谜团，或许永远都是。汤姆捉摸着拿这把刀在碗橱上乱刻一阵，正准备上手时候，却被叫去穿衣服准备上主日学校了。

Mary gave him a tin basin of water and a piece of soap, and he went outside the door and set the basin on a little bench there; then he dipped the soap in the water and laid it down; turned up his sleeves; poured out the water on the ground, gently, and then entered the kitchen and began to wipe his face diligently on the towel behind the door. But Mary removed the towel and said:

玛丽递给他一脸盆水和一块肥皂。他就走到门外，把脸盆放在那儿的一个小凳子上，然后把肥皂在水里蘸了蘸，又把它放下，他卷起袖子，轻轻地把水泼在地上，走进厨房，用挂在门后面的一条毛巾使劲地擦着脸。可是，玛丽把毛巾拿开了，说：

"Now ain't you ashamed, Tom. You mustn't be so bad. Water won't hurt you."

“嘿，你还不害臊啊？汤姆！你可别这么没治了。水可伤不着你。”

Tom was a trifle disconcerted. The basin was refilled, and this time he stood over it a little while, gathering resolution; took in a big breath and began. When he entered the kitchen presently, with both eyes shut and groping for the towel with his hands, an honorable testimony of suds and water was dripping from his face. But when he emerged from the towel, he was not yet satisfactory, for the clean territory stopped short at his chin and his jaws, like a mask; below and beyond this line there was a dark expanse of unirrigated soil that spread downward in front and backward around his neck. Mary took him in hand, and when she was done with him he was a man and a brother, without distinction of color, and his saturated hair was neatly brushed, and its short curls wrought into a dainty and symmetrical general effect. (He privately smoothed out the curls, with labor and difficulty, and plastered his hair close down to his head; for he held curls to be effeminate, and his own filled his life with bitterness.) Then Mary got out a suit of his clothing that had been used only on Sundays during two years — they were simply called his "other clothes" — and so by that we know the size of his wardrobe. The girl "put him to rights" after he had dressed himself; she buttoned his neat roundabout up to his chin, turned his vast shirt collar down over his shoulders, brushed him off and crowned him with his speckled straw hat. He now looked exceedingly improved and uncomfortable. He was fully as uncomfortable as he looked; for there was a restraint about whole clothes and cleanliness that galled him. He hoped that Mary would forget his shoes, but the hope was blighted; she coated them thoroughly with tallow, as was the custom, and brought them out. He lost his temper and said he was always being made to do everything he didn't want to do. But Mary said, persuasively:

汤姆有点不自在。脸盆重新又盛满了水，这一回，他俯身在脸盆边站了一会，下定了决心，然后深深吸了一口气，开始洗脸。过了一会儿他走进厨房，闭着眼睛伸手去摸那条毛巾，脸上的肥皂水直往下淌，这可证明他确确实实洗过脸了。可是他从毛巾后头露出脸的时候，看上去还是不怎么样。因为洗干净的地方只是有两腮帮子和下巴上面，看上去像个假面具似的。在这条分界线之下和之外，还有没沾过水的一大片，黑乎乎的，从脖子一直往后往下都是。玛丽又拉过他来帮他收拾。她把他梳洗打扮完毕之后，他看起来才像个男人，像个小兄弟，脸再也不是白一块黑一块了，那湿透了的头发也梳得整整齐齐，短短的卷发弄成了对称的样子，看上去还挺不错的。（他曾偷偷地摩挲自己的卷发把它弄平，费了好大劲儿，想把头发紧紧贴在头皮上。他觉得卷发很娘娘气，这可苦了他了。）然后玛丽把他的一套衣服拿出来，这套衣服这两年来只有星期天才穿——干脆就叫“其他的衣服”——由此我们可以知道他衣橱的大小了。他自己穿好衣服之后，玛丽又帮他修整了修整。她把他那件整洁的上装的衣扣统统扣上，一直扣到下巴底下，又把他那个宽大的衬衣领子往下一翻，搭在两边的肩上，再胡撸胡撸身上，戴上他那顶有斑点的草帽。这一下子他显得特别利索，看起来也特别不舒服。他就跟看上去一样不舒服。因为穿上这身衣服对他有种束缚感，还得保持整洁，让他心里烦躁不安。他希望玛丽忘了让他穿鞋子，可事与愿违。她按照惯例，先给鞋子抹了一层蜡油，然后把它拿了出来。他发火了，说别人老是让他干他自己不愿意干的事情，可是，玛丽却劝他说：

"Please, Tom — that's a good boy."

“汤姆——这才是个好孩子嘛。”

So he got into the shoes snarling. Mary was soon ready, and the three children set out for Sunday school — a place that Tom hated with his whole heart; but Sid and Mary were fond of it.

于是，汤姆吵吵嚷嚷地还是把鞋穿上了。玛丽也很快准备好了，三个孩子就一块动身去主日学校——那地方是汤姆最深恶痛绝的，但是，希德和玛丽对那儿却挺有好感。

Sabbath-school hours were from nine to half past ten; and then church service. Two of the children always remained for the sermon voluntarily, and the other always remained too — for stronger reasons. The church's high-backed, uncushioned pews would seat about three hundred persons; the edifice was but a small, plain affair, with a sort of pine board tree-box on top of it for a steeple. At the door Tom dropped back a step and accosted a Sunday-dressed comrade:

主日学校的上课时间是从9点到10点半。之后，就是做礼拜。他们三个中间有两个总是自觉自愿地留在那儿听牧师布道，而另外一个因为更重要原因也是每次都留下来。教堂里的座位靠背很高，没有垫子，一共可坐三百人。教堂是一座简陋的、规模不大的建筑。屋顶上安了一个松木板做的盒子似的装置当做尖塔。在门口，汤姆故意放慢一步，跟一个穿着星期天衣服的同伴打了招呼：

"Say, Billy, got a yaller ticket?"

“喂，贝利，你有黄色票吗？”

"Yes."

“有啊。”

"What'll you take for her?"

“你要什么东西才换呢？”

"What'll you give?"

“你准备用什么换？”

"Less see 'em."

“东西呢？”

Tom exhibited. They were satisfactory, and the property changed hands. Then Tom traded a couple of white alleys for three red tickets, and some small trifle or other for a couple of blue ones. He waylaid other boys as they came, and went on buying tickets of various colors ten or fifteen minutes longer. He entered the church, now, with a swarm of clean and noisy boys and girls, proceeded to his seat and started a quarrel with the first boy that came handy. The teacher, a grave, elderly man, interfered; then turned his back a moment and Tom pulled a boy's hair in the next bench, and was absorbed in his book when the boy turned around; stuck a pin in another boy, presently, in order to hear him say "Ouch!" and got a new reprimand from his teacher. Tom's whole class were of a pattern — restless, noisy, and troublesome. When they came to recite their lessons, not one of them knew his verses perfectly, but had to be prompted all along. However, they worried through, and each got his reward — in small blue tickets, each with a passage of Scripture on it; each blue ticket was pay for two verses of the recitation. Ten blue tickets equalled a red one, and could be exchanged for it; ten red tickets equalled a yellow one; for ten yellow tickets the superintendent gave a very plainly bound Bible (worth forty cents in those easy times) to the pupil. How many of my readers would have the industry and application to memorize two thousand verses, even for a Dor� Bible? And yet Mary had acquired two Bibles in this way — it was the patient work of two years — and a boy of German parentage had won four or five. He once recited three thousand verses without stopping; but the strain upon his mental faculties was too great, and he was little better than an idiot from that day forth — a grievous misfortune for the school, for on great occasions, before company, the superintendent (as Tom expressed it) had always made this boy come out and "spread himself." Only the older pupils managed to keep their tickets and stick to their tedious work long enough to get a Bible, and so the delivery of one of these prizes was a rare and noteworthy circumstance; the successful pupil was so great and conspicuous for that day that on the spot every scholar's heart was fired with a fresh ambition that often lasted a couple of weeks. It is possible that Tom's mental stomach had never really hungered for one of those prizes, but unquestionably his entire being had for many a day longed for the glory and the �clat that came with it.

汤姆就拿出来给他看了。贝利对东西很满意。两个人就把东西换了。接着，汤姆用两个白石头子换了三张红票，又用其他一些小玩意换了两张蓝票。别的孩子走过来的时候，汤姆又拦住他们，继续收买五颜六色的票，又花了十到十五分钟。汤姆现在和一群穿着整齐、吵吵嚷嚷的男孩和女孩一起走进教堂。他走到自己的座位上，和一个离他最近的男孩争吵起来。他们的老师是位板着脸、上了年纪的人，看见他们打架就呵斥开了。他一转过身去，汤姆又揪了另一条板凳上一个男孩的头发，那男孩转过头时，他却在全神贯注地在看书。又为了要听另一个男孩子叫一声“哎唷”，他又用一枚别针扎了那个男孩一下，结果这个男孩挨了老师一顿臭骂。汤姆这个班都这样——从不闲着，吵吵嚷嚷，这儿捣鼓捣鼓那儿捣捣乱的。他们一起背诵经文时，谁也背不下来全部内容，都必须一直给提示才行。然而，他们还是勉强过了关，而且个个都有奖励——蓝色的小纸票，每张票上都印有一段《圣经》上的话。要背两段《圣经》经文才能得这么样一张蓝色纸票。十张蓝色票等于一张红色票，也可以来交换。十张红色票又可以换一张黄色票。如果得了十张黄色票，校长就奖励给这个学生一本简装的《圣经》（在当初生活还不错的时候，值4角钱）。我亲爱的读者们当中，有谁肯这么用功，费劲去背上两千段《圣经》经文来换取一本多莱版的《圣经》呢？然而玛丽却用这种方法得了两本《圣经》——那可是耐心学了两年才得到的——还有一个德国血统的男孩得了四五本。他曾一下子背诵了三千段《圣经》，可是他用脑子用得太过度了，那以后差不多成了一个白痴——这对主日学校来说太不幸了，因为每逢盛大的场面，在许多来宾面前（据汤姆的讲法），校长总是叫这个男孩出来“露一手”。只有那些年龄大的学生才能用功刻苦足够长时间去得到一本《圣经》。所以，每次颁奖都罕见难得，轰动一时。得奖的同学在当时如此伟大光荣，每个在场的学生心里都产生重新焕发的野心，这种野心往往又要持续上几个星期。汤姆内心可能从来没真想去得奖，不过长时间以来他的全部身心都在渴望得到随着这种奖励而来的光彩和荣誉，这是毋庸置疑的。

In due course the superintendent stood up in front of the pulpit, with a closed hymnbook in his hand and his forefinger inserted between its leaves, and commanded attention. When a Sunday-school superintendent makes his customary little speech, a hymnbook in the hand is as necessary as is the inevitable sheet of music in the hand of a singer who stands forward on the platform and sings a solo at a concert — though why, is a mystery: for neither the hymnbook nor the sheet of music is ever referred to by the sufferer.

等到一定时候，校长在布道台前面站了起来，他手里拿着一本合上的圣诗，食指夹在书页中间，叫大家静下来，听他讲道。主日学校的校长开始他那已成定规的简短的开场白时，手中总少不了要拿着一本圣诗，就像歌手举行独唱音乐会站在台上，手中也少不了要拿本乐谱那样——虽然谁也不知道为什么要这样。因为无论圣诗也好，乐谱也好，台上正受罪的那个人从来没看过一眼。

This superintendent was a slim creature of thirty-five, with a sandy goatee and short sandy hair; he wore a stiff standing collar whose upper edge almost reached his ears and whose sharp points curved forward abreast the corners of his mouth — a fence that compelled a straight lookout ahead, and a turning of the whole body when a side view was required; his chin was propped on a spreading cravat which was as broad and as long as a banknote, and had fringed ends; his boot toes were turned sharply up, in the fashion of the day, like sleigh runners — an effect patiently and laboriously produced by the young men by sitting with their toes pressed against a wall for hours together. Mr. Walters was very earnest of mien, and very sincere and honest at heart; and he held sacred things and places in such reverence, and so separated them from worldly matters, that unconsciously to himself his Sunday-school voice had acquired a peculiar intonation which was wholly absent on weekdays. He began after this fashion:

这位校长是个35岁的瘦子，蓄着黄棕色的山羊胡和短头发；他穿的衣服的领子硬邦邦的，领边几乎顶到他耳边，两个尖尖的领角顺着脖子弯过来，齐到他的嘴角——就像一堵围墙似的，逼着他只能往前方看，他要看旁边的话，就不得不把整个身子都转过来；他的下巴托在一条宽大的领结上面，那个领结就像一张支票那样又宽又长，周围还带有花边。他的靴子头尖尖的，向上翘着，这在当时是时兴的款式，好像雪橇下面翘起来的滑刀一样——年轻人们耐心费力地好几个钟头把脚趾顶着墙才弄得出这种效果。华尔特先生心里庄重而虔诚。他对宗教方面的事情和场所非常尊敬，把它们和世俗方面的事分得清清楚楚。因此尽管没有意识到，却养成了主日学校讲话时一种平时说话的时候没有的语调。他就用这种语调开始说起来：

"Now, children, I want you all to sit up just as straight and pretty as you can and give me all your attention for a minute or two. There — that is it. That is the way good little boys and girls should do. I see one little girl who is looking out of the window — I am afraid she thinks I am out there somewhere — perhaps up in one of the trees making a speech to the little birds. (Applausive titter.) I want to tell you how good it makes me feel to see so many bright, clean little faces assembled in a place like this, learning to do right and be good." And so forth and so on. It is not necessary to set down the rest of the oration. It was of a pattern which does not vary, and so it is familiar to us all.

“孩子们，现在我要你们尽量坐好啦，集中注意力听我讲一两分钟话。对——就这样。乖孩子们就应该这样做嘛。我看见一个小姑娘在向窗外看——我想她肯定觉得我在外面呢——也许想着我在树上给小鸟讲话呢吧。（一阵嘻嘻哈哈的喝彩声。）我想告诉你们看到这么多聪明的、干干净净的小脸儿聚集在这样的地方，听话、学好，我心里是多么的高兴。”这样的话他讲得连篇。我就不用把下面的话都写下来了。反正是些千篇一律老生常谈的东西。

The latter third of the speech was marred by the resumption of fights and other recreations among certain of the bad boys, and by fidgetings and whisperings that extended far and wide, washing even to the bases of isolated and incorruptible rocks like Sid and Mary. But now every sound ceased suddenly, with the subsidence of Mr. Walters' voice, and the conclusion of the speech was received with a burst of silent gratitude.

华尔特先生的演说到后面三分之一时受到了一些干扰，一些不老实的孩子又打起架来或搞别的小动作，越来越多的人讲起悄悄话。连玛丽和希德这样不“同流合污”，屹立不倒的“中流砥柱”也架不住了。华尔特先生的声音突然终止，课堂里的一切吵闹声也都随之戛然止住，大家用安静表示内心的感激：演说终于结束啦。

A good part of the whispering had been occasioned by an event which was more or less rare — the entrance of visitors: lawyer Thatcher, accompanied by a very feeble and aged man; a fine, portly, middle-aged gentleman with iron-gray hair; and a dignified lady who was doubtless the latter's wife. The lady was leading a child. Tom had been restless and full of chafings and repinings; conscience-smitten, too — he could not meet Amy Lawrence's eye, he could not brook her loving gaze. But when he saw this small newcomer his soul was all ablaze with bliss in a moment. The next moment he was "showing off " with all his might — cuffing boys, pulling hair, making faces — in a word, using every art that seemed likely to fascinate a girl and win her applause. His exaltation had but one alloy — the memory of his humiliation in this angel's garden — and that record in sand was fast washing out, under the waves of happiness that were sweeping over it now.

刚才那阵子骚动的始作俑者是一件多少有些稀罕的事儿——有几位客人来了：有撒切尔律师，他由一个非常衰弱的老人陪伴，一位文雅、肥胖、满头铁灰色头发的中年绅士，还有一位贵夫人，她无疑是那位绅士的太太。这位夫人手里还牵着一个小孩。汤姆心里一直很不安，烦死了，惆怅不堪，良心备受谴责——他不敢正视艾美·劳伦斯的眼睛，受不了她含情脉脉的眼神。可是当他看见这位新来的小女孩，幸福的感觉又在心里燃烧了起来。接着他就拼命地卖弄炫耀——打别人的耳光，揪头发，做鬼脸——总而言之，想方设法引起女孩的注意，讨她的欢心。他高兴是高兴，就是想到在她家花园里受到的鄙视，有点不爽，不过这很快就像留在沙滩上的印迹一样，在幸福的浪潮的冲刷下消失得一干二净。

The visitors were given the highest seat of honor, and as soon as Mr. Walters' speech was finished, he introduced them to the school. The middle-aged man turned out to be a prodigious personage — no less a one than the county judge — altogether the most august creation these children had ever looked upon — and they wondered what kind of material he was made of — and they half wanted to hear him roar, and were half afraid he might, too. He was from Constantinople, twelve miles away — so he had traveled, and seen the world — these very eyes had looked upon the county courthouse — which was said to have a tin roof. The awe which these reflections inspired was attested by the impressive silence and the ranks of staring eyes. This was the great Judge Thatcher, brother of their own lawyer. Jeff Thatcher immediately went forward, to be familiar with the great man and be envied by the school. It would have been music to his soul to hear the whisperings:

这几位来访者被请到了最上座，华尔特先生讲话一结束，就向全校师生介绍了这几位贵宾。那位中年人敢情是个大人物——比县上的法官差不到哪儿去——他是这些孩子们所见过的最威严的人物——他们很想知道他到底有几斤几两——又很想听听他吼叫两声，可真要叫起来也挺害怕的。他是离这儿十二里地远的君士坦丁堡镇人——出过不少远门、见过不少世面——他亲眼目睹过县上的法庭——据说那所房子有个锡皮的屋顶。想到这些，大家都对他肃然起敬，所有人没发出一丁点声音，只是一排排的眼睛瞪大盯着他。这就是声名显赫的撒切尔大法官，是他们镇上律师的哥哥。杰夫·撒切尔立即走上前，和这位大人物亲近，全校师生心生嫉妒。听大家窃窃私语着，他心里像听到了音乐，别提多高兴了。

"Look at him, Jim! He's a-going up there. Say — look! He's a-going to shake hands with him — he is shaking hands with him! By jings, don't you wish you was Jeff?"

“吉姆，你看！他上讲台了。嘿——瞧！他要和他握手啦——他真的和他握手了！哎呀，真希望自己就是杰夫！”

Mr. Walters fell to "showing off," with all sorts of official bustlings and activities, giving orders, delivering judgments, discharging directions here, there, everywhere that he could find a target. The librarian "showed off " — running hither and thither with his arms full of books and making a deal of the splutter and fuss that insect authority delights in. The young lady teachers "showed off " — bending sweetly over pupils that were lately being boxed, lifting pretty warning fingers at bad little boys and patting good ones lovingly. The young gentlemen teachers "showed off " with small scoldings and other little displays of authority and fine attention to discipline — and most of the teachers, of both sexes, found business up at the library, by the pulpit; and it was business that frequently had to be done over again two or three times (with much seeming vexation). The little girls "showed off " in various ways, and the little boys "showed off " with such diligence that the air was thick with paper wads and the murmur of scufflings. And above it all the great man sat and beamed a majestic judicial smile upon all the house, and warmed himself in the sun of his own grandeur — for he was "showing off," too.

华尔特先生开始“出风头”了，就跟个官儿一样到处发号施令，品头论足，指指点点，只要他看见哪儿能插上一脚。图书管理员也“卖弄”了一番——他怀里抱着好多书这儿跑那儿跑的忙乎着，这么做起码让那些有点小权的人高兴满意。年轻的女教师们也“炫耀”了一番——亲切地弯下腰看着那些刚被打过耳光的学生，伸出漂亮的手指警告那些不听话的孩子，或是亲切地拍拍听话的孩子。年轻的男教师们也“出了一番风头”，他们小声训学生一顿，显示显示自己有权威，很注意着学校的规矩——所有男男女女的教师们都在布道台旁的图书室那儿找事儿干。本来干一次就行的事儿，他们却反复干了两三次（表面上装出很着急的样子）。小姑娘们也用各种方式“卖弄”，男孩子“卖弄”得更是劲头十足，空中满是乱飞的纸团，教室里互相扭打的声音不断。在这乱哄哄的全场之上，那位大人端坐着，洋溢着法官般庄严的微笑，沐浴在自己的伟大当中——因为他自己也在“炫耀”啊。

There was only one thing wanting to make Mr. Walters' ecstasy complete, and that was a chance to deliver a Bible prize and exhibit a prodigy. Several pupils had a few yellow tickets, but none had enough — he had been around among the star pupils inquiring. He would have given worlds, now, to have that German lad back again with a sound mind.

这时候只差一件事情，就能使华尔特先生狂喜到极点了，如果能有机会给某个学生颁发一本奖品《圣经》，借以展示一下自己的魅力就好了。有几个学生拥有一些黄色票，可没有一个够数的——他在几个有名的学生中间转了一圈，问了问。这时候如果能叫那个德国血统的学生脑子正常起来，再来露一手，真是让他付出什么都行。

And now at this moment, when hope was dead, Tom Sawyer came forward with nine yellow tickets, nine red tickets, and ten blue ones, and demanded a Bible. This was a thunderbolt out of a clear sky. Walters was not expecting an application from this source for the next ten years. But there was no getting around it — here were the certified checks, and they were good for their face. Tom was therefore elevated to a place with the Judge and the other elect, and the great news was announced from headquarters. It was the most stunning surprise of the decade, and so profound was the sensation that it lifted the new hero up to the judicial one's altitude, and the school had two marvels to gaze upon in place of one. The boys were all eaten up with envy — but those that suffered the bitterest pangs were those who perceived too late that they themselves had contributed to this hated splendor by trading tickets to Tom for the wealth he had amassed in selling whitewashing privileges. These despised themselves, as being the dupes of a wily fraud, a guileful snake in the grass.

这时候眼看希望就要泡汤了，汤姆·索亚却走上前来，手里拿着九张黄票、九张红票和十张蓝票，请求得到一本《圣经》。晴天霹雳啊。再过十年，华尔特先生也不会料想竟是这个家伙走上前来。可躲又躲不过去——票绝对没假，票面值也没伪造。于是，汤姆就被拔到了与法官和贵宾平起平坐的位置，他的丰功伟绩就从主席台上公布于众了。这是十年来最令人吃惊的事情，这爆炸般的新闻把这位新英雄托到了与法官大人同等的地位。这下子学校的人们瞪着眼睛看的是两位显赫之辈，不是一个了。男孩子们更是忌妒得咬牙切齿——可是最痛心疾首的还是那些和汤姆交换宝贝的孩子们，而他的那些宝贝都是出卖刷墙特权时候攒的。现在他们都痛恨极了汤姆的荣誉，可意识到的时候也晚了。这些孩子们都自惭形秽，现在才明白他们的对手是个诡计多端的骗子，是一条藏在草里狡诈的蛇，而他们自己却是受了骗的笨蛋。

The prize was delivered to Tom with as much effusion as the superintendent could pump up under the circumstances; but it lacked somewhat of the true gush, for the poor fellow's instinct taught him that there was a mystery here that could not well bear the light, perhaps; it was simply preposterous that this boy had warehoused two thousand sheaves of Scriptural wisdom on his premises — a dozen would strain his capacity, without a doubt.

校长给汤姆发奖的时候，这种场合下他绞尽脑汁找出一些赞美表扬的话来说。可是他话里好像没有多少是肺腑之言，因为这位可怜家伙的本能告诉他，这里面可能有猫腻。这孩子脑子里真的能装下两千段圣书里的经文，真会让人笑掉大牙——十几段经文就够他受的了，这还用说。

The prize was delivered to Tom with as much effusion as the superintendent could pump up under the circumstances; but it lacked somewhat of the true gush, for the poor fellow's instinct taught him that there was a mystery here that could not well bear the light, perhaps; it was simply preposterous that this boy had warehoused two thousand sheaves of Scriptural wisdom on his premises — a dozen would strain his capacity, without a doubt.

校长给汤姆发奖的时候，这种场合下他绞尽脑汁找出一些赞美表扬的话来说。可是他话里好像没有多少是肺腑之言，因为这位可怜家伙的本能告诉他，这里面可能有猫腻。这孩子脑子里真的能装下两千段圣书里的经文，真会让人笑掉大牙——十几段经文就够他受的了，这还用说。

Amy Lawrence was proud and glad, and she tried to make Tom see it in her face — but he wouldn't look. She wondered; then she was just a grain troubled; next a dim suspicion came and went — came again; she watched; a furtive glance told her worlds — and then her heart broke, and she was jealous, and angry, and the tears came and she hated everybody. Tom most of all (she thought).

艾美·劳伦斯既得意又高兴，她想方设法地要汤姆在她脸上看出这点来——可是，汤姆偏不朝她这边看。她还挺纳闷，不禁有点慌了神，然后隐隐约约又有点怀疑，又不怀疑了——紧接着又怀疑起来。她盯着他看了一会儿，当看到汤姆偷偷地瞟了新来的女孩子一眼时，什么都明白了——于是她心碎了，忌妒了，火冒三丈，跟着眼泪也流了出来。她恨所有的人。最恨最恨的是汤姆（她心里想）。

Tom was introduced to the Judge; but his tongue was tied, his breath would hardly come, his heart quaked — partly because of the awful greatness of the man, but mainly because he was her parent. He would have liked to fall down and worship him, if it were in the dark. The Judge put his hand on Tom's head and called him a fine little man, and asked him what his name was. The boy stammered, gasped, and got it out:

校长把汤姆介绍给法官大人，可是他结结巴巴的，喘不过气来，心也跳得厉害——一半是因为这位大人物的威严，更主要是因为他是新来女孩的父亲。如果是在漆黑一片的晚上，他就会向他下跪磕头了。大法官把手放在汤姆的头上，说他是个好小伙子，还问他叫什么名字。这孩子结结巴巴，喘着粗气，从牙缝里挤出来：

"Tom."

“汤姆。”

"Oh, no, not Tom — it is —"

“哦，不对，不是汤姆——应该是——”

"Thomas."

“托马斯。”

"Ah, that's it. I thought there was more to it, maybe. That's very well. But you've another one I daresay, and you'll tell it to me, won't you?"

“哦，原来如此啊。我觉得还有点什么吧。喔，这就对了。你肯定还有一半吧，也许该有。你告诉我，好不好？”

"Tell the gentleman your other name, Thomas," said Walters, "and say sir. You mustn't forget your manners."

“托马斯，告诉法官大人你姓什么！”华尔特先生赶忙说，“还要称呼先生。别忘了礼貌！”

"Thomas Sawyer — sir."

“托马斯·索亚——先生。”

"That's it! That's a good boy. Fine boy. Fine, manly little fellow. Two thousand verses is a great many — very, very great many. And you never can be sorry for the trouble you took to learn them; for knowledge is worth more than anything there is in the world; it's what makes great men and good men; you'll be a great man and a good man yourself, some day, Thomas, and then you'll look back and say, It's all owing to the precious Sunday-school privileges of my boyhood — it's all owing to my dear teachers that taught me to learn — it's all owing to the good superintendent, who encouraged me, and watched over me, and gave me a beautiful Bible — a splendid elegant Bible — to keep and have it all for my own, always — it's all owing to right bringing up! That is what you will say, Thomas — and you wouldn't take any money for those two thousand verses — no indeed you wouldn't. And now you wouldn't mind telling me and this lady some of the things you've learned — no, I know you wouldn't — for we are proud of little boys that learn. Now, no doubt you know the names of all the twelve disciples. Won't you tell us the names of the first two that were appointed?"

“这就对了！这才是个好孩子。很不错的小伙子。有出息的小男子汉。两千段的圣书经文可真不少——实在，实在是够多的。你背这些经文花那么多功夫，一辈子也不会后悔的，因为知识是宝贵的，比世上一切财富都有价值。知识能造就伟人，造就好人；你就会成为一个伟人和好人的。托马斯，等将来有一天，当你回首往事时，你会说，一切都归功于我小时侯有幸上的主日学校的经历——归功于教授我知识的那些亲爱的老师们——归功于我的好校长，他鼓励我，督促我，还给了我一本漂亮的《圣经》——一本漂亮而精美的《圣经》——让我自己永远保留——这一切多亏了我的老师们教导有方啊！这就是你将来会说的，托马斯——你那两千段经文别人无论给你多少钱，你也不会卖吧！——你肯定不会卖的。你如果不介意的话，把你学到的东西说给我和这位太太听听吧——我知道你不会介意的——因为我们是非常赞赏好学的孩子。那么，不用问，你肯定知道所有十二门徒的名字，就把耶稣最初选定的两个门徒的名字告诉我们，好不好？”

Tom was tugging at a buttonhole and looking sheepish. He blushed, now, and his eyes fell. Mr. Walters' heart sank within him. He said to himself, it is not possible that the boy can answer the simplest question — why did the Judge ask him? Yet he felt obliged to speak up and say: "Answer the gentleman, Thomas — don't be afraid."

汤姆捏住一个钮扣眼使劲地拉，样子显得很害羞。他的脸“唰”地红了，眼睛也耷拉了下来。华尔特先生的心也随之一沉。他心里想，这个孩子连最简单的问题都不可能回答出来——为什么法官偏要问他？然而他又不得不开口，说道：“托马斯，回答法官大人的问题——不要害怕。”

Tom still hung fire.

汤姆仍一言不发。

"Now I know you'll tell me," said the lady. "The names of the first two disciples were —"

“好吧，我知道你会跟我讲，”那位太太说。“最初的两个门徒的名字是——”

"DAVID AND GOLIATH!"

“大卫和哥利亚斯——”

Let us draw the curtain of charity over the rest of the scene.

我们还是发发慈悲就此闭幕吧。





Chapter 5


第五章

ABOUT half past ten the cracked bell of the small church began to ring, and presently the people began to gather for the morning sermon.

大约10点半的时候，小教堂的破钟开始响了起来，随即大家便开始聚集在一起听上午的布道。

The Sunday-school children distributed themselves about the house and occupied pews with their parents, so as to be under supervision. Aunt Polly came, and Tom and Sid and Mary sat with her — Tom being placed next the aisle, in order that he might be as far away from the open window and the seductive outside summer scenes as possible. The crowd filed up the aisles: the aged and needy postmaster, who had seen better days; the mayor and his wife — for they had a mayor there, among other unnecessaries; the justice of the peace; the widow Douglas, fair, smart, and forty, a generous, good-hearted soul and well-todo, her hill mansion the only palace in the town, and the most hospitable and much the most lavish in the matter of festivities that St. Petersburg could boast; the bent and venerable Major and Mrs. Ward; lawyer Riverson, the new notable from a distance; next the belle of the village, followed by a troop of lawn-clad and ribbon-decked young heartbreakers; then all the young clerks in town in a body — for they had stood in the vestibule sucking their cane heads, a circling wall of oiled and simpering admirers, till the last girl had run their gantlet; and last of all came the Model Boy, Willie Mufferson, taking as heedful care of his mother as if she were cut glass. He always brought his mother to church, and was the pride of all the matrons. The boys all hated him, he was so good. And besides, he had been "thrown up to them" so much. His white handkerchief was hanging out of his pocket behind, as usual on Sundays — accidentally. Tom had no handkerchief, and he looked upon boys who had, as snobs.

主日学校的孩子们在房子周围分散开来各随各的父母坐在教堂里，这样家长好看着他们。波莉姨妈来了，汤姆、希德和玛丽在她旁边坐下来。汤姆被安排在靠近过道的位子上坐着，这样做是让他尽可能离开着的窗户和外面让他分心的夏天的景致越远越好。人们顺着走道鱼贯而入：有上了年纪而穷困潦倒的邮政局局长，他以前生活也挺好的；有镇长和他的太太——这地方竟然还有个镇长，还有其他许多没有必要的官员；有治安法官；有道格拉斯，她是个寡妇，长得小巧漂亮，40来岁，为人宽厚，心地很好，生活水平也不错，她山上的住宅是镇上唯一的宫殿，最热情好客，过节的时候也最慷慨；有华德少校和他的夫人，都已经驼背了，不过很受人尊敬；还有维尔逊律师，是大老远新来的显赫人物；再下面就是镇上的大美人，后面跟着一大帮让人害单相思病的年轻姑娘，穿细麻布衣服，扎着缎带；跟在她们之后的是镇上所有年轻的店员和职员——开始都站在门廊里，嘬着自己的手指头，像一圈发疯了的追求者一样围在那儿站成一道墙似的，一直到最后一个姑娘走出他们的包围圈为止；最后进来的一位是村里的模范儿童威利·莫夫逊，他对他母亲照顾得无微不至，就好像她是件易碎的雕花玻璃品似的。他总是领着他妈妈到教堂来，其他的妈妈都为他感到骄傲。而男孩子们都恨他，他表现太好了。而且他常常被夸奖，作为别人的楷模。他白色的手绢耷拉在屁股口袋的外面，星期天通常是这样——做出不经意的样子。汤姆没有手绢，他就瞧不起那些有手绢的孩子们，把他们看做是势利眼。

The congregation being fully assembled, now, the bell rang once more, to warn laggards and stragglers, and then a solemn hush fell upon the church which was only broken by the tittering and whispering of the choir in the gallery. The choir always tittered and whispered all through service. There was once a church choir that was not ill-bred, but I have forgotten where it was, now. It was a great many years ago, and I can scarcely remember anything about it, but I think it was in some foreign country.

听布道的人到齐后，大钟又响了一遍，为的是提醒那些迟到和在外面乱跑的人。教堂里一片寂静，显得十分庄严，只有边座席上唱诗班里有些嘻嘻哈哈和咬耳朵的声音，打破了这种寂静。自始至终，唱诗班里一直有人在窃窃私语，低声说笑。曾有过一个唱诗班不像这样没教养，可我现在想不起来那是在什么地方了。那是许多年以前的事了，我几乎没什么印象了，不过，我想大概是在外国吧。

The minister gave out the hymn, and read it through with a relish, in a peculiar style which was much admired in that part of the country. His voice began on a medium key and climbed steadily up till it reached a certain point, where it bore with strong emphasis upon the topmost word and then plunged down as if from a springboard:

牧师拿出了大家要唱的歌颂主的歌词，他津津有味地念了一遍，他那特别的强调在那地区尤其受欢迎。他的音调先由一个中音开始，逐渐升高，一直升到最高音的一个字，强调了一下，然后就像从跳板上跳下来一样，突然降低；

Shall I be car-ried toe the skies, on flow'ry beds of ease, Whilst others fight to win the prize, and sail thro' bloody seas?

为获功勋别人正浴血奋战/在沙场；我岂能安睡花床梦想/进天堂。

He was regarded as a wonderful reader. At church "sociables" he was always called upon to read poetry; and when he was through, the ladies would lift up their hands and let them fall helplessly in their laps, and "wall" their eyes, and shake their heads, as much as to say, "Words cannot express it; it is too beautiful, too beautiful for this mortal earth."

大家觉得他的朗读水平简直好得没治了。在教堂的“联欢会”上，人们经常请他朗诵诗文，每当他念完之后，妇女们都要举起双手，然后软绵绵地把手落在膝上，一面“转溜”着眼珠子，一面摇头，好像在说：“这真是妙不可言，太美了，这样动听的声音在这尘世间实在是太难得了。”

After the hymn had been sung, the Rev. Mr. Sprague turned himself into a bulletin board, and read off "notices" of meetings and societies and things till it seemed that the list would stretch out to the crack of doom — a queer custom which is still kept up in America, even in cities, away here in this age of abundant newspapers. Often, the less there is to justify a traditional custom, the harder it is to get rid of it.

唱完颂主歌之后，牧师斯普拉格先生就把自己变成了一块布告牌，开始宣布一些集会和团体的通知之类的事情，他说个没完，似乎这份单子直到世界末日霹雳声响时才停止——这是一种至今还在美国保留着的奇怪习惯，甚至在当今新闻报纸很多的城市里还没有改变。通常传统习俗越是没有多少理由存在，越是难把它铲除。

And now the minister prayed. A good, generous prayer it was, and went into details: it pleaded for the church, and the little children of the church; for the other churches of the village; for the village itself; for the county; for the State; for the State officers; for the United States; for the churches of the United States; for Congress; for the President; for the officers of the Government; for poor sailors, tossed by stormy seas; for the oppressed millions groaning under the heel of European monarchies and Oriental despotisms; for such as have the light and the good tidings, and yet have not eyes to see nor ears to hear withal; for the heathen in the far islands of the sea; and closed with a supplication that the words he was about to speak might find grace and favor, and be as seed sown in fertile ground, yielding in time a grateful harvest of good. Amen.

再后来牧师就做祷告了。这篇祷告内容丰富，细致入微：它为教堂和里面的孩子们祈祷；为其他村庄的教堂祈祷；为村子本身，为全县城，为国家，为国家的干部们，为美国，为美国的教堂，为国会，为总统，为执政者祈祷；为在风暴肆虐的海洋上航行的可怜的水手们求福；为被迫在欧洲君主制度和东方专制制度铁蹄下呻吟着的数百万劳苦大众求福；为那些受圣光和福音恩惠而熟视无睹、充耳不闻的人求福；为远处海岛上的那些异教徒求福；最后牧师祈求天主恩准他所说的话，希望他的话像播种在肥沃土地里的种子一样，将会开花结果，造福无穷。阿门。

There was a rustling of dresses, and the standing congregation sat down. The boy whose history this book relates did not enjoy the prayer, he only endured it — if he even did that much. He was restive all through it; he kept tally of the details of the prayer, unconsciously — for he was not listening, but he knew the ground of old, and the clergyman's regular route over it — and when a little trifle of new matter was interlarded, his ear detected it and his whole nature resented it; he considered additions unfair, and scoundrelly.

站着的人们都坐了下来，衣服发出沙沙的声响。这本书里讲述的主人公并不享受这篇祷告词，他只是忍受着罢了——能忍受就算不错了。他在祈祷过程中，一直不安分。他记录下祷告的详细内容，不过是无意识地这么做——因为他没有听，但是他熟悉牧师的陈词滥调——每当祷告词里加进一点新内容时，他的耳朵立刻就能辨别出来，而且浑身上下都不舒服。他认为加进去的太不合适，也不光明正大，简直是在耍无赖。

In the midst of the prayer a fly had lit on the back of the pew in front of him and tortured his spirit by calmly rubbing its hands together, embracing its head with its arms, and polishing it so vigorously that it seemed to almost part company with the body, and the slender thread of a neck was exposed to view; scraping its wings with its hind legs and smoothing them to its body as if they had been coattails; going through its whole toilet as tranquilly as if it knew it was perfectly safe. As indeed it was; for as sorely as Tom's hands itched to grab for it they did not dare — he believed his soul would be instantly destroyed if he did such a thing while the prayer was going on. But with the closing sentence his hand began to curve and steal forward; and the instant the "Amen" was out the fly was a prisoner of war. His aunt detected the act and made him let it go.

在祈祷做到半中间的时候，有一只苍蝇落在他前面的座椅靠背上，它不慌不忙地搓着腿，伸出胳膊抱住头，用劲地擦着脑袋，它的头几乎好像要和身子分家似的，脖子细的像根线，露出来看得清清楚楚。它又用后腿蹭了蹭翅膀，贴着身体捋了捋，好像翅膀是它礼服的后摆；它的动作慢极了，好像知道它的处境绝对安全。这只苍蝇的逍遥劲可让汤姆心里不好受。小东西的确很安全。汤姆慢慢伸出两只手想抓它，却又不敢——他相信在做祷告时干这种事情，他的灵魂立刻就会遭到毁灭的。可是，当祷告讲到最后一句时，他弓着手背悄悄地把手向苍蝇靠过去，“阿门”刚一说出口，苍蝇就做了阶下囚。他姨妈发现了他在干什么，马上就让他把苍蝇放了。

The minister gave out his text and droned along monotonously through an argument that was so prosy that many a head by and by began to nod — and yet it was an argument that dealt in limitless fire and brimstone and thinned the predestined elect down to a company so small as to be hardly worth the saving. Tom counted the pages of the sermon; after church he always knew how many pages there had been, but he seldom knew anything else about the discourse. However, this time he was really interested for a little while. The minister made a grand and moving picture of the assembling together of the world's hosts at the millennium when the lion and the lamb should lie down together and a little child should lead them. But the pathos, the lesson, the moral of the great spectacle were lost upon the boy; he only thought of the conspicuousness of the principal character before the onlooking nations; his face lit with the thought, and he said to himself that he wished he could be that child, if it was a tame lion.

牧师念着经文，单调地啰唆着，实在是太没意思了，好多人渐渐地低下头打瞌睡——他讲的尽是五花八门的地狱刑罚，让人觉得能够有资格让上帝选入天堂的真是太少了，还有什么值得拯救啊。汤姆计算着祷告词的页数，做完礼拜他总能说出牧师经文的页数，至于内容嘛，几乎什么都不知道。然而这一回，他对内容真有点感兴趣了。牧师描绘了幅辉煌而动人的画面：在新千年的时候，全世界各族人民团聚在一起，狮子和羊羔躺在一起，一个孩子领着它们。可汤姆一点也没在意这场面的感人之处，和故事的寓意，他只是想着在全国人民的注视下的那个主角。想到这里，他的脸上露出喜色。他暗自想如果那头狮子驯服的话，他真想自己就是那孩子。

Now he lapsed into suffering again, as the dry argument was resumed. Presently he bethought him of a treasure he had and got it out. It was a large black beetle with formidable jaws — a "pinch bug," he called it. It was in a percussion-cap box. The first thing the beetle did was to take him by the finger. A natural fillip followed, the beetle went floundering into the aisle and lit on its back, and the hurt finger went into the boy's mouth. The beetle lay there working its helpless legs, unable to turn over. Tom eyed it, and longed for it; but it was safe out of his reach. Other people uninterested in the sermon found relief in the beetle, and they eyed it too. Presently a vagrant poodle dog came idling along, sad at heart, lazy with the summer softness and the quiet, weary of captivity, sighing for change. He spied the beetle; the drooping tail lifted and wagged. He surveyed the prize; walked around it; smelt at it from a safe distance; walked around it again; grew bolder, and took a closer smell; then lifted his lip and made a gingerly snatch at it, just missing it; made another, and another; began to enjoy the diversion; subsided to his stomach with the beetle between his paws, and continued his experiments; grew weary at last, and then indifferent and absent-minded. His head nodded, and little by little his chin descended and touched the enemy, who seized it. There was a sharp yelp, a flirt of the poodle's head, and the beetle fell a couple of yards away, and lit on its back once more. The neighboring spectators shook with a gentle inward joy, several faces went behind fans and handkerchiefs, and Tom was entirely happy. The dog looked foolish, and probably felt so; but there was resentment in his heart, too, and a craving for revenge. So he went to the beetle and began a wary attack on it again; jumping at it from every point of a circle, lighting with his fore paws within an inch of the creature, making even closer snatches at it with his teeth, and jerking his head till his ears flapped again. But he grew tired once more, after a while; tried to amuse himself with a fly but found no relief; followed an ant around, with his nose close to the floor, and quickly wearied of that; yawned, sighed, forgot the beetle entirely, and sat down on it.

汤姆又开始痛苦了，牧师又继续往下布道。他马上想起了他的一个宝贝玩意，赶快把它拿了出来。那是一只下巴骨长得可怕的大黑甲虫——他叫它“大钳甲虫”。这只甲虫是装在雷管筒子里的。这只虫子被放出来后的第一件事，就是咬汤姆的手指。他很自然地弹了一下手指，那甲虫就滚到过道里，仰面朝天。汤姆把弄疼的手指放在嘴里。那甲虫无奈地弹动着它那几条腿，翻不了身。汤姆看着它，想把它抓回来，可是怎么也够不到。其他对牧师布道也不感兴趣的人觉得那只甲虫能解解闷儿，也都盯着它看。这时一只游荡的狮子狗懒洋洋地走过来，心情郁闷，暖洋洋的太阳晒得它直发懒，它被圈在屋里待腻了，很想出来透透气。它一眼发现了这只甲虫，耷拉着的尾巴立即竖起来，晃动着。它瞧了瞧这个家伙，围着它转了一圈，远远地闻了闻，又围着它走了一圈，胆子渐渐大了起来，靠近点又闻了闻。狗张开嘴，小心翼翼地想把它咬住，可是却没咬住。于是它试了一回，又试了一回，渐渐地觉得这小东西挺让它开心的，便把肚子贴着地，把虫子夹在两脚中间，继续捉弄它。最后它终于厌烦了，变得漠不关心，心不在焉。它开始打起了瞌睡，下巴一点一点往下低，刚一碰到甲虫，甲虫就把它给咬住了。狮子狗尖叫一声，猛然摇了一下头，于是甲虫飞出了一两码，又摔得仰面朝天。邻座看热闹的人心里不由得开心地偷笑，有些人用扇子和手绢遮住了脸，汤姆别提多高兴了。那只狗看起来傻乎乎的，也许它自己也这么觉得吧，可是它耿耿于怀，打算报复一番。于是，它又走近甲虫，开始小心地攻击它，后来又围着圈攻击它，前爪离甲虫还不到一英尺远，又靠上去用牙齿去咬它，脑袋晃悠着，耳朵扇悠着。可是，过了一会儿，它又觉得没趣儿了。它本想拿只苍蝇来寻开心，可是还是不能解闷，鼻子贴着地面，跟着一只蚂蚁走，不一会又觉得没劲打了呵欠，叹了口气，把那只甲虫忘得一干二净，一屁股坐在了上面。

Then there was a wild yelp of agony and the poodle went sailing up the aisle; the yelps continued, and so did the dog; he crossed the house in front of the altar; he flew down the other aisle; he crossed before the doors; he clamored up the home-stretch; his anguish grew with his progress, till presently he was but a woolly comet moving in its orbit with the gleam and the speed of light. At last the frantic sufferer sheered from its course, and sprang into its master's lap; he flung it out of the window, and the voice of distress quickly thinned away and died in the distance.

就听到一声痛苦的惨叫，这狗在过道上飞奔起来。它不停地叫，不停地跑，从圣坛前面跑过去，跑到了另一边的过道上。它又从大门那儿跑出去，跑到门边上的最后一段跑道，它越跑越是痛得难受，后来就成了一个毛茸茸的彗星，用光速和光一般的亮度在轨道上跑着。最后这只痛得发疯的狮子狗偏了轨，跳到主人的怀里，主人一把抓住它，把它扔到窗户外，痛苦的叫声很快地小下来，最后消失在远方。

By this time the whole church was red-faced and suffocating with suppressed laughter, and the sermon had come to a dead standstill. The discourse was resumed presently, but it went lame and halting, all possibility of impressiveness being at an end; for even the gravest sentiments were constantly being received with a smothered burst of unholy mirth, under cover of some remote pew back, as if the poor parson had said a rarely facetious thing. It was a genuine relief to the whole congregation when the ordeal was over and the benediction pronounced.

这时候，教堂里所有的人都因为克制住自己不笑憋得满脸通红，喘不过气来，布道声戛然止住，一片寂静。接着牧师又开始讲道，犹犹豫豫而且时念时停，不可能再引起什么注意了，因为即使是最严肃的内容也总是被远处座位背后忍不住失敬的笑声打断，好像这个可怜的人刚刚说了什么可笑的事情。整个集会结束了，牧师给大家祝福，全场终于松了口气。

Tom Sawyer went home quite cheerful, thinking to himself that there was some satisfaction about divine service when there was a bit of variety in it. He had but one marring thought; he was willing that the dog should play with his pinch bug, but he did not think it was upright in him to carry it off.

汤姆·索亚兴高采烈地回了家。他心里想，做礼拜时再加上点花样，倒挺有趣的。美中不足的是：他愿意让那只狗和大钳甲虫玩耍，可是它竟然带着甲虫跑了，这未免太不够意思了。





Chapter 6


第六章

MONDAY morning found Tom Sawyer miserable . Monday morning always found him so — because it began another week's slow suffering in school. He generally began that day with wishing he had had no intervening holiday, it made the going into captivity and fetters again so much more odious.

星期一早晨，汤姆·索亚不怎么舒服。周一早上他一般都这样，因为一个在学校漫长而难熬的星期又开始了。他在这一天总是想要是没有这个休息日夹在中间倒也好些，有了那一天，再让他回到学校这个监牢里，更让他深恶痛绝。

Tom lay thinking. Presently it occurred to him that he wished he was sick; then he could stay home from school. Here was a vague possibility. He canvassed his system. No ailment was found, and he investigated again. This time he thought he could detect colicky symptoms, and he began to encourage them with considerable hope. But they soon grew feeble, and presently died wholly away. He reflected further. Suddenly he discovered something. One of his upper front teeth was loose. This was lucky; he was about to begin to groan, as a "starter," as he called it, when it occurred to him that if he came into court with that argument, his aunt would pull it out, and that would hurt. So he thought he would hold the tooth in reserve for the present, and seek further. Nothing offered for some little time, and then he remembered hearing the doctor tell about a certain thing that laid up a patient for two or three weeks and threatened to make him lose a finger. So the boy eagerly drew his sore toe from under the sheet and held it up for inspection. But now he did not know the necessary symptoms. However, it seemed well worth while to chance it, so he fell to groaning with considerable spirit.

汤姆躺在那想着。忽然他想到，要是生病了该多好啊。这样，他就能待在家里不去上学了。这个嘛，还是有点可能的。他把自己浑身上下仔细地检查了一下。没什么毛病啊，他又看了看。这次他想找到肚子疼的症状，真希望肚子马上疼起来。可疼痛感越来越弱，马上就一点也不疼了。于是他又动起脑筋来。突然，他发现目标了。他的上排门牙有一颗松动了。他真是太幸运了。他刚要开始叫唤，用他的话说这叫“开场白”，这时他猛然想起如果真是跟姨妈这么说的话，他姨妈就会当真把这颗牙拔出来，那会疼死的。所以他打算把这颗牙当做备用理由，再找找别的毛病。找了一段时间，他没找到什么毛病，后来他想起曾听医生说过有一种病能让病人躺两三个星期，甚至可能让他失去一根手指。汤姆迫不及待地把他那只肿痛的脚趾头从被子里拽出来，举起来仔细看了看。可他不知道这种病到底有什么症状。可是还是值得试试的，所以他就跟真事儿似地开始叫唤起来。

But Sid slept on unconscious.

可是希德还是睡着，一点反应都没有。

Tom groaned louder, and fancied that he began to feel pain in the toe.

汤姆叫唤得更大声了，而且有了幻觉，脚趾头真的开始疼了。

No result from Sid.

希德还是没什么反应。

Tom was panting with his exertions by this time. He took a rest and then swelled himself up and fetched a succession of admirable groans.

这次他太卖劲了，累地喘着粗气。他歇了一会，重新鼓起劲头，叫唤得可真是像。

Sid snored on. Tom was aggravated. He said, "Sid, Sid!" and shook him. This course worked well, and Tom began to groan again. Sid yawned, stretched, then brought himself up on his elbow with a snort, and began to stare at Tom. Tom went on groaning. Sid said: "Tom! Say, Tom!" (No response.) "Here, Tom! Tom! What is the matter, Tom?" And he shook him and looked in his face anxiously.

希德还在打着呼噜。汤姆来火了。他喊道：“希德，希德！”边喊边推推他。这招果然奏效，汤姆又开始叫唤起来。希德打着呵欠，伸伸懒腰，用胳膊肘撑起了身子，擤了擤鼻子，然后盯着汤姆看。汤姆继续叫唤着。希德就问：“汤姆！嘿，汤姆！”（汤姆没搭腔。）“怎么啦，汤姆！汤姆！你怎么啦，汤姆？”他推了推汤姆，焦急地看着他的脸。

Tom moaned out: "Oh, don't, Sid. Don't joggle me."

汤姆叫唤着说：“啊，希德，别，别，别推我。”

"Why, what's the matter, Tom? I must call auntie."

“嘿，汤姆，你怎么啦？我得去叫姨妈来。”

"No — never mind. It'll be over by and by, maybe. Don't call anybody."

“不——不要紧。这慢慢就会好的，也许是吧。谁也不用叫。”

"But I must! Don't groan so, Tom, it's awful. How long you been this way?"

“我一定要去叫！不要再这样叫唤了，怪让人糁的慌的。你这么难受有多久了？”

"Hours. Ouch! Oh, don't stir so, Sid, you'll kill me."

“好几个小时了，哎唷！希德，不要推我，你想要我的命啊！”

"Tom, why didn't you wake me sooner? Oh, Tom, don't! It makes my flesh crawl to hear you. Tom, what is the matter?"

“汤姆，你为什么不早点把我叫醒了啊？哦，汤姆，不要叫唤了！听你这么叫我身上都起鸡皮疙瘩。汤姆，哪儿不舒服？”

"I forgive you everything, Sid. (Groan.) Everything you've ever done to me. When I'm gone —"

“希德，我什么事情都原谅你。(呻吟。)你对我做的所有的事。我死了以后……”

"Oh, Tom, you ain't dying, are you? Don't, Tom — oh, don't. Maybe —"

“喔，汤姆，你不会死的，对吧？别这样，汤姆——啊，别这样。也许……”

"I forgive everybody, Sid. (Groan.) Tell 'em so, Sid. And Sid, you give my window sash and my cat with one eye to that new girl that's come to town, and tell her —"

“希德，我原谅所有的人。（呻吟。）希德，请你转告他们吧。希德，你把我那个窗户框子和那只独眼小猫给那个新搬来的姑娘吧，你对她说……”

But Sid had snatched his clothes and gone. Tom was suffering in reality, now, so handsomely was his imagination working, and so his groans had gathered quite a genuine tone.

可是希德早就抓起衣服跑出去了。现在汤姆真的是很难受极了，他的想象力太到位了，叫唤得就像真的一样。

Sid flew downstairs and said:

希德飞奔下楼梯，一边跑一边喊：

"Oh, Aunt Polly, come! Tom's dying!"

“波莉姨妈，快来呀！汤姆要死了！”

"Dying!"

“要死了！”

"Yes'm.

“是啊。

Don't wait — come quick!"

来不及了，快来！”

"Rubbage! I don't believe it!"

“胡说！我不信。”

But she fled upstairs, nevertheless, with Sid and Mary at her heels. And her face grew white, too, and her lip trembled. When she reached the bedside she gasped out:

可是她还是赶快地跑上楼去，希德和玛丽紧跟在后面。这时她脸色也白了，嘴唇直发抖。来到床边后，她喘着气问：

"You, Tom! Tom, what's the matter with you?"

“你，汤姆！汤姆，你哪里不舒服啊？”

"Oh, auntie, I'm —"

“哦，姨妈，我——”

"What's the matter with you — what is the matter with you, child?"

“你哪里不舒服——孩子，你到底怎么啦？”

"Oh, auntie, my sore toe's mortified!"

“哦，姨妈，我那只肿痛的脚趾头发炎了！”

The old lady sank down into a chair and laughed a little, then cried a little, then did both together. This restored her and she said:

老太太一屁股坐在椅子上，笑了笑，哭了哭，然后又哭又笑。等到她缓过劲来了，便说：

"Tom, what a turn you did give me. Now you shut up that nonsense and climb out of this."

“汤姆，你真的把我吓坏了。好了，闭上嘴巴，别再胡扯八道了，快起床吧。”

The groans ceased and the pain vanished from the toe. The boy felt a little foolish, and he said:

呻吟声停了，脚趾也立刻不疼了。这孩子觉得自己显得有点傻，于是他说：

"Aunt Polly, it seemed mortified, and it hurt so I never minded my tooth at all."

“波莉姨妈，脚趾头一发炎，痛得我把牙齿的事也给忘了。”

"Your tooth, indeed! What's the matter with your tooth?"

“你的牙齿，怪了！牙齿又怎么啦？”

"One of them's loose, and it aches perfectly awful."

“有一颗牙松动了，而且疼得的确挺难受的。”

"There, there, now, don't begin that groaning again. Open your mouth. Well — your tooth is loose, but you're not going to die about that. Mary, get me a silk thread, and a chunk of fire out of the kitchen."

“得了，得了，你可别再叫唤了。张开嘴，嗯——你的一颗牙齿确实松了，不过你绝不会痛死的。玛丽，拿根丝线给我，再到厨房去弄块烧红的火炭来。”

Tom said:

汤姆说：

"Oh, please, auntie, don't pull it out. It don't hurt any more. I wish I may never stir if it does. Please don't, auntie. I don't want to stay home from school."

“啊，姨妈，别拔了。现在牙不痛了。要是再痛，我也不叫唤了。姨妈，请您别拔啦。我不想待在家里逃学了。”

"Oh, you don't, don't you? So all this row was because you thought you'd get to stay home from school and go a-fishing? Tom, Tom, I love you so, and you seem to try every way you can to break my old heart with your outrageousness." By this time the dental instruments were ready. The old lady made one end of the silk thread fast to Tom's tooth with a loop and tied the other to the bedpost. Then she seized the chunk of fire and suddenly thrust it almost into the boy's face. The tooth hung dangling by the bedpost, now.

“哦，你不逃学了，是吗？原来你这么大叫大闹，为的就是你以为这样就可以待在家里，不去上学去钓鱼呀？汤姆呀，汤姆，我这么心疼你，可是你好像尽捣乱，不让我省心。”这时候，拔牙的工具已经准备好了。老太太把丝线的一头打了活结，牢牢地系在汤姆的那颗牙上，另一头系在床柱上。然后她拿起那块烧红的火炭一扔，差点砸他脸上。那颗牙就晃来晃去吊在床柱上了。

But all trials bring their compensations. As Tom wended to school after breakfast, he was the envy of every boy he met because the gap in his upper row of teeth enabled him to expectorate in a new and admirable way. He gathered quite a following of lads interested in the exhibition; and one that had cut his finger and had been a centre of fascination and homage up to this time, now found himself suddenly without an adherent, and shorn of his glory. His heart was heavy, and he said with a disdain which he did not feel that it wasn't anything to spit like Tom Sawyer; but another boy said, "Sour grapes!" and he wandered away a dismantled hero.

可是有所失就有所得。当汤姆吃过早饭去上学的时候，在路上遇到的每个孩子都羡慕他，因为他上排牙齿的缺口能让他用一种新的方法吐唾沫，所有孩子都羡慕得不行。一大群孩子们跟在他后面，对他这种表演很感兴趣。有一个割破手指的孩子，大家都敬佩他，围着他转，现在忽然没有人追随他了，也没了风头。他心里闷闷不乐，却满瞧不起地说，像汤姆·索亚那样吐唾沫那算什么啊，可是他心里并不真的这么认为。另外有个孩子说：“酸葡萄！”于是汤姆成了一位落荒而逃的英雄。

Shortly Tom came upon the juvenile pariah of the village, Huckleberry Finn, son of the town drunkard. Huckleberry was cordially hated and dreaded by all the mothers of the town, because he was idle and lawless and vulgar and bad — and because all their children admired him so, and delighted in his forbidden society, and wished they dared to be like him. Tom was like the rest of the respectable boys, in that he envied Huckleberry his gaudy outcast condition, and was under strict orders not to play with him. So he played with him every time he got a chance. Huckleberry was always dressed in the cast-off clothes of full-grown men, and they were in perennial bloom and fluttering with rags. His hat was a vast ruin with a wide crescent lopped out of its brim; his coat, when he wore one, hung nearly to his heels and had the rearward buttons far down the back; but one suspender supported his trousers; the seat of the trousers bagged low and contained nothing, the fringed legs dragged in the dirt when not rolled up.

不久汤姆遇到了村子里的坏孩子哈克贝利·费恩，他是本镇一个酒鬼的儿子。全镇所有的母亲们对哈克贝利都深恶痛绝而又很怕他：他游手好闲，什么违法的事都干，而且既下流又没教养——所有的孩子都特别羡慕他这样。虽然大人们都不允许他们和他接触，他们却都愿意和他玩儿，还希望自己也敢学他那样。和其他许多体面的孩子们一样，汤姆很羡慕哈克贝利那种逍遥自在的流浪儿生活，可是姨妈也严厉地告诉过他不许和哈克贝利玩儿。所以，他一有机会就和他混在一起。哈克贝利经常穿着大人们扔了的旧衣服，总是满身开花，破布乱飘。他的帽子很大很破，一块月牙形的突出耷拉在帽子沿儿。他要是穿着上装的话，那上装就差不多拖到他的脚后跟，他一直把衣服后面的扣子扣到屁股，裤子却只有一根带子在那儿吊着，裤裆像个空口袋似地耷拉得很低，里面什么都没有。裤腿没有卷起的时候，毛了边的下半截就在灰土里拖来拖去。

Huckleberry came and went, at his own free will. He slept on doorsteps in fine weather and in empty hogsheads in wet; he did not have to go to school or to church, or call any being master or obey anybody; he could go fishing or swimming when and where he chose, and stay as long as it suited him; nobody forbade him to fight; he could sit up as late as he pleased; he was always the first boy that went barefoot in the spring and the last to resume leather in the fall; he never had to wash, nor put on clean clothes; he could swear wonderfully. In a word, everything that goes to make life precious that boy had. So thought every harassed, hampered, respectable boy in St. Petersburg.

哈克贝利想来就来，想走就走。天气好的时候他就在台阶上睡觉，下雨时，就睡到大空桶里。他不用去上学也不必去做礼拜，不必叫谁老师，也不用听谁的话；他想什么时候去钓鱼就去钓鱼，想游泳就去游泳，地方随便挑，而且想待多长间就待多长时间；也没有人管住他打架；晚上他乐意熬夜到什么时候就熬到什么时候；春天他总是第一个光着脚，到了秋天却是最后一个穿上鞋；他从来不用洗脸，也不用穿干净衣服；他可以随便骂人，而且特别会骂。总而言之，他有了一切能让生活有滋有味的事情。圣彼得堡镇的那些受折磨、受拘束的体面孩子们个个都是这么想的。

Tom hailed the romantic outcast:

汤姆向那个浪漫的流浪儿打着招呼：

"Hello, Huckleberry!"

“你好啊，哈克贝利！”

"Hello yourself, and see how you like it."

“你也好啊，看看喜不喜欢这玩意儿。”

"What's that you got?"

“你得了什么宝贝？”

"Dead cat."

“一只死猫。”

"Lemme see him, Huck. My, he's pretty stiff. Where'd the adventures of tom sawyer you get him?"

“哈克，让我瞅瞅。嗐，这家伙硬硬的。你从哪弄来的？”

"Bought him off 'n a boy."

“从一个孩子那儿买来的。”

"What did you give?"

“拿什么买的？”

"I give a blue ticket and a bladder that I got at the slaughterhouse."

“我给他一张蓝色票和一只从屠宰厂那儿弄来的尿泡。”

"Where'd you get the blue ticket?"

“你的蓝票是从哪儿弄来的？”

"Bought it off 'n Ben Rogers two weeks ago for a hoopstick."

“两星期前用一根推铁环的棍子和贝恩·罗杰换的。”

"Say — what is dead cats good for, Huck?"

“我说——哈克，死猫能有什么用？”

"Good for? Cure warts with."

“有什么用？可以治疣子。”

"No! Is that so? I know something that's better."

“不会吧！真能治吗？我知道有更好的办法。”

"I bet you don't. What is it?"

“我敢打赌你不知道。是什么方子？”

"Why, spunk-water."

“不就是仙水吗。”

"Spunk-water! I wouldn't give a dern for spunk-water."

“仙水！我一点都看不上仙水。”

"You wouldn't, wouldn't you? D'you ever try it?"

“你看不上，是不是？你试过吗？”

"No, I hain't. But Bob Tanner did."

“没有试过。可是鲍勃·唐纳试过。”

"Who told you so!"

“你怎么知道的？”

"Why, he told Jeff Thatcher, and Jeff told Johnny Baker, and Johnny told Jim Hollis, and Jim told Ben Rogers, and Ben told a nigger, and the nigger told me. There now!"

“噢，他告诉杰夫·撒切尔，杰夫又告诉江尼·贝克，江尼又告诉吉姆·赫利斯，吉姆又告诉本·罗杰，罗杰又告诉了一个黑人，那黑人又告诉了我。这不，我就知道了。”

"Well, what of it? They'll all lie. Leastways all but the nigger. I don't know him. But I never see a nigger that wouldn't lie. Shucks! Now you tell me how Bob Tanner done it, Huck."

“得，你知道又有什么？他们都在撒谎，那个黑人可能除外。我不认识他，不过我从来也没见过有哪个黑人不撒谎的。呸！那么哈克你说说鲍勃·唐纳怎么试的吧。”

"Why, he took and dipped his hand in a rotten stump where the rain water was."

“噢，他把手伸进一个烂了的老树桩里面，还有雨水呢。”

"In the daytime?"

“在白天干的吗？”

"Certainly."

“那还用说。”

"With his face to the stump?"

“脸对着树桩吗？”

"Yes. Least I reckon so."

“对呀。至少我是这么合计的。”

"Did he say anything?"

“他没说什么？”

"I don't reckon he did. I don't know."

“我估计没有。我不清楚。”

"Aha! Talk about trying to cure warts with spunk-water such a blame fool way as that! Why, that ain't a-going to do any good. You got to go all by yourself, to the middle of the woods, where you know there's a spunkwater stump, and just as it's midnight you back up against the stump and jam your hand in and say:

“啊！怎么能用那笨办法治疣子啊！哎，那不灵。你必须自己走到树林中间，找到那个有仙水的树桩，等到正好半夜的时候，你背对着树桩，把手塞进去，嘴里要念：‘

Barley-corn, barley-corn, injun-meal shorts, Spunk-water, spunk-water, swaller these warts,'

麦粒麦粒，还有玉米粉，仙水仙水，治好这疣子。’

and then walk away quick, eleven steps, with your eyes shut, and then turn around three times and walk home without speaking to anybody. Because if you speak the charm's busted."

念完之后，就闭着眼睛，立刻走开，走十一步，然后转三圈，不要和任何人讲话径直回家。如果你一讲话，那符咒就不灵了。”

"Well, that sounds like a good way; but that ain't the way Bob Tanner done."

“哼，这办法听起来倒是不错；不过鲍勃·唐纳不是这样做的。”

"No, sir, you can bet he didn't, becuz he's the wartiest boy in this town; and he wouldn't have a wart on him if he'd knowed how to work spunk-water. I've took off thousands of warts off of my hands that way, Huck. I play with frogs so much that I've always got considerable many warts. Sometimes I take 'em off with a bean."

“嘿，伙计，他当然没有这样做，所以他是这个镇上疣子长得最多的一个。他要是晓得怎么使用仙水，那他身上就会一个疣子都没有了。哈克，用那个办法我已经治好手上无数个疣子。我老爱玩癞蛤蟆，所以我老是长出许许多多的疣子。有时候我就拿蚕豆来治它们。”

"Yes, bean's good. I've done that."

“是啊，蚕豆挺管用的。我也这样治过。”

"Have you? What's your way?"

“是吗？你是怎么做的？”

"You take and split the bean, and cut the wart so as to get some blood, and then you put the blood on one piece of the bean and take and dig a hole and bury it 'bout midnight at the crossroads in the dark of the moon, and then you burn up the rest of the bean. You see that piece that's got the blood on it will keep drawing and drawing, trying to fetch the other piece to it, and so that helps the blood to draw the wart, and pretty soon off she comes."

“你把蚕豆分成两瓣，把疣子弄破弄出点血来，然后把血弄在一片蚕豆上，趁着半夜三更没有月亮的时候，找个岔路口，挖个坑把这片蚕豆埋到地下，再把另外半片烧掉。你看有血的那半片蚕豆不停地在吸啊吸啊，想把另外那半片吸过去，这样的话加快血吸疣子的速度，过不了多久，疣子就掉了。”

"Yes, that's it, Huck — that's it; though when you're burying it if you say 'Down bean; off wart; come no more to bother me!' it's better. That's the way Joe Harper does, and he's been nearly to Coonville and most everywheres. But say — how do you cure 'em with dead cats?"

“对对对没错，哈克，就是这么干的。当然你埋蚕豆的时候，你要说：‘埋下蚕豆，消掉疣子，不要再来烦我！’这会更好些的。乔·哈帕就是这样做的，他差不多到过康维尔，还有许多别的地儿呢。可是话说回来，用死猫怎么治疣子呢？”

"Why, you take your cat and go and get in the graveyard 'long about midnight when somebody that was wicked has been buried; and when it's midnight a devil will come, or maybe two or three, but you can't see 'em, you can only hear something like the wind, or maybe hear 'em talk; and when they're taking that feller away, you heave your cat after 'em and say, 'Devil follow corpse, cat follow devil, warts follow cat, I'm done with ye!' That'll fetch any wart."

“唉，你拿着死猫等半夜有坏蛋被埋时，到坟地去。半夜的时候魔鬼就来了，可能三两成群，不过你看不见他们，只能听到风一样的声音，或者能听见他们说话。他们带那坏蛋到阴曹地府去时，你往他们后面扔死猫还要念道：‘鬼跟尸跑，猫跟鬼跑，疣子跟着猫，我和疣子一刀两断了！’这样保管什么疣子都治好。”

"Sounds right. D'you ever try it, Huck?"

“这听起来倒是蛮有道理。哈克，你试过没有？”

"No, but old Mother Hopkins told me."

“没有。不过霍普金斯老太婆跟我说过。”

"Well, I reckon it's so, then. Becuz they say she's a witch."

“是啊，她可能说过。因为人们说她是个巫婆。”

"Say! Why, Tom, I know she is. She witched pap. Pap says so his own self. He come along one day, and he sees she was a-witching him, so he took up a rock, and if she hadn't dodged, he'd a got her. Well, that very night he rolled off 'n a shed wher' he was a-layin' drunk, and broke his arm."

“可不是吗，汤姆，我知道她是。她迷惑过我爹。这是我爹亲口说的。有一天，他走过来，见她要迷惑他，就捡起一块大石头，要不是她躲闪得及时，就砸中她了。可是也就在当天夜里，他喝醉了酒，躺在一个小木屋顶上，不知怎么就摔下来，摔断了一只胳膊。”

"Why, that's awful. How did he know she was a-witching him?"

“哎呀，真倒霉。你爹是怎么知道她要迷惑他的呢？”

"Lord, pap can tell, easy. Pap says when they keep looking at you right stiddy, they're a-witching you. Specially if they mumble. Becuz when they mumble they're saying the Lord's Prayer backwards."

“哦，天哪！我爹一眼就看出来了。我爹说她们死死地盯着你时，她们就是在迷惑你了，尤其是嘴里还念念叨叨的时候。因为她们念叨的时候她们把圣经的祷文倒过来念。”

"Say, Hucky, when you going to try the cat?"

“嘿，我说哈克，你打算什么时候去试着用这猫治疣子？”

"Tonight. I reckon they'll come after old Hoss Williams tonight."

“今天夜里。我猜鬼会去抓霍斯·威廉斯这老家伙。”

"But they buried him Saturday. Didn't they get him Saturday night?"

“可他们周六已经把他埋了。他们星期六夜里没来把他弄走吗？”

"Why, how you talk! How could their charms work till midnight? — and then it's Sunday. Devils don't slosh around much of a Sunday, I don't reckon."

“嘿，你说什么呢！半夜之后念咒怎么管用啊？午夜一过那可就是星期天了。星期天鬼是不怎么四处游荡的，我觉得是。”

"I never thought of that. That's so. Lemme go with you?"

“我从来没有想到这一点。是这么回事呀。让我和你一起去，好吗？”

"Of course — if you ain't afeard."

“当然好了——只要你不害怕就行。”

"Afeard! Tain't likely. Will you meow?"

“害怕！不可能的事。你来学猫叫好吗？”

"Yes — and you meow back, if you get a chance. Last time, you kep' me a-meowing around till old Hays went to throwing rocks at me and says 'Dern that cat!' and so I hove a brick through his window — but don't you tell."

“好。如果我叫了，你也冲我叫一声，看时机合适的时候。上一回，你让我老在那学猫咪呜咪呜的，后来黑斯这老头就冲我扔石头，还说‘去他妈的贱猫！’所以我就朝他家扔了砖头。你可别跟别人说啊。”

"I won't. I couldn't meow that night, becuz auntie was watching me, but I'll meow this time. Say — what's that?"

“我不会说的。那天晚上我学不了猫叫，姨妈一直在盯着我。不过这回我会叫的。嘿，那是什么？”

"Nothing but a tick."

“只是个扁虱罢了。”

"Where'd you get him?"

“在哪搞到的？”

"Out in the woods."

“在外面的树林里。”

"What'll you take for him?"

“拿什么东西跟你换，你才干？”

"I don't know. I don't want to sell him."

“我不知道。我不想把它卖掉。”

"All right. It's a mighty small tick, anyway."

“那好吧。反正这扁虱挺小的。”

"Oh, anybody can run a tick down that don't belong to them. I'm satisfied with it. It's a good enough tick for me."

“哦，吃不到葡萄就说葡萄酸。我倒觉得它挺好的。这玩意儿我觉得够好的了。”

"Sho, there's ticks a-plenty. I could have a thousand of 'em if I wanted to."

“哼，扁虱多得是。我要是想要的话，一千个我也能搞到。”

"Well, why don't you? Becuz you know mighty well you can't. This is a pretty early tick, I reckon. It's the first one I've seen this year."

“喂，得了吧，因为你自己知道你搞不到。这可是个挺早出来的扁虱，是我今年见到的头一个。”

"Say, Huck — I'll give you my tooth for him."

“那么，哈克，我用我的牙齿跟你换扁虱吧。”

"Less see it."

“让我瞧瞧。”

Tom got out a bit of paper and carefully unrolled it. Huckleberry viewed it wistfully. The temptation was very strong. At last he said:

汤姆拿出一个小纸包，小心翼翼地打开它。哈克贝利牙直痒痒。这诱惑太大了。最后，他说：

"Is it genuwyne?"

“这是真牙齿吗？”

Tom lifted his lip and showed the vacancy.

汤姆翻起嘴唇，给他看了看牙齿留下的洞。

"Well, all right," said Huckleberry, "it's a trade."

“哼，那好吧。”哈克贝利说，“换就换吧。”

Tom enclosed the tick in the percussion-cap box that had lately been the pinch bug's prison, and the boys separated, each feeling wealthier than before.

汤姆把扁虱装进前几天囚禁大钳甲虫的那个雷管筒子里后，两人就分道扬镳了，都觉得自己赚了一笔。

When Tom reached the little isolated frame schoolhouse, he strode in briskly, with the manner of one who had come with all honest speed. He hung his hat on a peg and flung himself into his seat with businesslike alacrity. The master, throned on high in his great splint-bottom armchair, was dozing, lulled by the drowsy hum of study. The interruption roused him.

汤姆来到那座孤零零的小木框校舍的时候，轻松愉快地大步流星走进教室，好像真是赶时间来上学的。他把帽子挂在钉子上，一本正经地三步并作两步地坐到他的座位上。老师正高高地坐在他那把大细藤条扶手椅上，正在读书的催眠声中打着盹。汤姆进来的动静把他吵醒了。

"Thomas Sawyer!"

“托马斯·索亚！”

Tom knew that when his name was pronounced in full, it meant trouble.

汤姆知道老师要是叫他全名，那就有麻烦了。

"Sir!"

“到，老师！”

"Come up here. Now, sir, why are you late again, as usual?"

“过来，我问你。好家伙，你怎么老是迟到啊？”

Tom was about to take refuge in a lie, when he saw two long tails of yellow hair hanging down a back that he recognized by the electric sympathy of love; and by that form was the only vacant place on the girls' side of the schoolhouse. He instantly said:

汤姆正要撒个谎躲避过去，这时他看到一个人的背上垂下两条长长的金黄色辫子，一股爱情的暖流涌遍全身。她的旁边正好有个空位子。他立刻说：

"I STOPPED TO TALK WITH HUCKLEBERRY FINN!"

“我在路上和哈克贝利·费恩聊天来着！”

The master's pulse stood still, and he stared helplessly. The buzz of study ceased. The pupils wondered if this foolhardy boy had lost his mind. The master said:

老师气得脉搏都要停止跳动了，他无可奈何地盯着汤姆。乱哄哄的读书声也停止了。学生们都很纳闷，这个莽撞的家伙是不是脑子里哪根弦儿搭错了。老师说：

"You — you did what?"

“你，你干了什么？”

"Stopped to talk with Huckleberry Finn."

“路上和哈克贝利·费恩讲话耽搁了。”

There was no mistaking the words.

他说得一清二楚。

"Thomas Sawyer, this is the most astounding confession I have ever listened to. No mere ferule will answer for this offence. Take off your jacket."

“托马斯·索亚，这可是我听到的最让我瞠目结舌的交代了。光是戒尺不足以惩罚你犯的错误。把上衣脱掉！”

The master's arm performed until it was tired and the stock of switches notably diminished. Then the order followed: "Now, sir, go and sit with the girls! And let this be a warning to you."

直到老师的胳臂发酸，戒尺明显都磨损了，他才住手。接着下了道命令：“去吧！去和姑娘们坐在一块，这对你算是一次警告。”

The titter that rippled around the room appeared to abash the boy, but in reality that result was caused rather more by his worshipful awe of his unknown idol and the dread pleasure that lay in his high good fortune. He sat down upon the end of the pine bench and the girl hitched herself away from him with a toss of her head. Nudges and winks and whispers traversed the room, but Tom sat still, with his arms upon the long, low desk before him, and seemed to study his book.

教室里到处都是窃窃私语声，似乎是这让汤姆害臊脸红。但实际上，他脸红更是因为崇拜敬畏那位素不相识的偶像，还有幸能和她同桌。他在松木板凳的一头坐下来，那女孩子甩了甩头，往另一边挪了挪。大家相互推推胳膊，眨眨眼睛，咬咬耳朵。可是汤姆还是坐得端正，两只胳膊放在面前既长又矮的书桌上，好像在看书学习。

By and by attention ceased from him, and the accustomed school murmur rose upon the dull air once more. Presently the boy began to steal furtive glances at the girl. She observed it, "made a mouth" at him and gave him the back of her head for the space of a minute. When she cautiously faced around again, a peach lay before her. She thrust it away. Tom gently put it back. She thrust it away again, but with less animosity. Tom patiently returned it to its place. Then she let it remain. Tom scrawled on his slate, "Please take it — I got more." The girl glanced at the words, but made no sign. Now the boy began to draw something on the slate, hiding his work with his left hand. For a time the girl refused to notice; but her human curiosity presently began to manifest itself by hardly perceptible signs. The boy worked on, apparently unconscious. The girl made a sort of noncommittal attempt to see, but the boy did not betray that he was aware of it. At last she gave in and hesitatingly whispered:

渐渐地，大家的注意力不再集中在汤姆身上，沉闷的空气里又嗡嗡地响起了低沉的读书声。后来，汤姆偷偷看了那女孩几眼。女孩发现了汤姆的举动，“朝他做了鬼脸”之后得有一分钟，她都是用后脑勺冲着他。等她小心翼翼地转过脸来时，有一个桃子摆在了她的面前。她把桃子推开，汤姆又轻轻地把它放回去。她又把桃子推开，不过没那么大敌意了。汤姆耐心地把它又放回原处。这次女孩就让桃子待在那儿了。汤姆在他的写字板上写了几个字：“请你收下吧，我多得是哩。”那女孩瞥了瞥这些字，也没什么表示。现在汤姆开始在写字板上画画，用左手挡着。有好一阵子，那女孩坚决不去看他作画，可是本能的好奇心开始让她做出几乎察觉不到的举动，去看他的画。汤姆继续画着，好像没注意到女孩的举动。那女孩想看但只是试探了一下，可汤姆没表现出他已经察觉了。最后她让了步，犹犹豫豫小声说道：

"Let me see it."

“让我看看吧。”

Tom partly uncovered a dismal caricature of a house with two gable ends to it and a corkscrew of smoke issuing from the chimney. Then the girl's interest began to fasten itself upon the work and she forgot everything else. When it was finished, she gazed a moment, then whispered:

汤姆稍稍挪开左手，石板上画的是座房子，画得既不好又模模糊糊，两个山墙头，还有一缕炊烟从烟囱里袅袅升起。可是姑娘的兴趣开始被牢牢吸引住了，她把其他什么都忘了。汤姆画完了，她盯着看了一会，然后悄悄跟他说：

"It's nice — make a man."

“画得真好——再画一个人上去。”

The artist erected a man in the front yard, that resembled a derrick. He could have stepped over the house; but the girl was not hypercritical; she was satisfied with the monster, and whispered:

于是，这位“画家”就在前院里画了一个人，形状有点像起重机。比例太不协调了，好像那个人一大步就可以跨过房子。可是这姑娘并不那么斤斤计较。她觉得这个大怪物挺好的。她低声说：

"It's a beautiful man — now make me coming along."

“这个人画得真好看。现在再画我正在走过来吧。”

Tom drew an hourglass with a full moon and straw limbs to it and armed the spreading fingers with a portentous fan. The girl said:

汤姆就画了个水漏或沙漏，加上一轮满月，四肢像草扎似的，张开的手指拿着一把大得可怕的扇子。姑娘说：

"It's ever so nice — I wish I could draw."

“画得太好了。真希望我也会画啊。”

"It's easy," whispered Tom, "I'll learn you."

“这容易，”汤姆低声说道，“我教你。”

"Oh, will you? When?"

“哦，是吗？什么时候啊？”

"At noon. Do you go home to dinner?"

“中午。你回家吃饭吗？”

"I'll stay if you will."

“如果你教我我就不回了。”

"Good — that's a whack. What's your name?"

“太好了——听起来不错。你叫什么名字？”

"Becky Thatcher. What's yours? Oh, I know. It's Thomas Sawyer."

“贝基·撒切尔，你呢？哦，我知道。你叫托马斯·索亚。”

"That's the name they lick me by. I'm Tom when I'm good. You call me Tom, will you?"

“他们揍我时，就叫我这个名字。我表现好的时候叫做汤姆。你叫我汤姆，好吗？”

"Yes."

“好啊。”

Now Tom began to scrawl something on the slate, hiding the words from the girl. But she was not backward this time. She begged to see. Tom said:

这时候汤姆开始在写字板上画着什么，挡着不让女孩看见写的字。可这回女孩不再退缩了。她请求汤姆给她看。汤姆说：

"Oh, it ain't anything."

“啊，没什么好看的。”

"Yes it is."

“不，一定有好看的。”

"No it ain't. You don't want to see."

“真的没什么好看的。再说，你也不会爱看这个。”

"Yes I do, indeed I do. Please let me."

“我要看，我真的要看。请让我看一看。”

"You'll tell."

“你会说出去的。”

"No I won't — deed and deed and double deed I won't."

“不会，决不会，百分之一百二十地不会。”

"You won't tell anybody at all? Ever, as long as you live?"

“跟任何人你都不会说吗？永远不说，一辈子不说？”

"No, I won't ever tell anybody. Now let me."

“是的，我不会告诉任何人，现在让我看吧。”

"Oh, you don't want to see!"

“啊，你真想看吗！”

"Now that you treat me so, I will see." And she put her small hand upon his and a little scuffle ensued, Tom pretending to resist in earnest but letting his hand slip by degrees till these words were revealed: "I love you."

“既然你这样待我，我就一定要看！”于是她把小手儿按在他手上，两个人争了一会儿，汤姆假装拼命捂着不让她看的样子，可是手渐渐移开，最后露出了三个字：“我爱你。”

"Oh, you bad thing!" And she hit his hand a smart rap, but reddened and looked pleased, nevertheless.

“啊，你坏蛋！”她用力打了他的手，脸虽然红了，可是看起来还挺高兴的。

Just at this juncture the boy felt a slow, fateful grip closing on his ear, and a steady lifting impulse. In that vise he was borne across the house and deposited in his own seat, under a peppering fire of giggles from the whole school. Then the master stood over him during a few awful moments, and finally moved away to his throne without saying a word. But although Tom's ear tingled, his heart was jubilant.

就在这时，汤姆觉得有人正慢慢使劲抓着他的耳朵，逐渐向上提。就这样，在一片尖刻的咯咯笑声中他被钳着耳朵，从教室这边拉到那边自己的座位上。接着老师在他身旁站了一会，教室里大气都不敢出，终究什么都没说回到了自己的宝座上。汤姆虽然耳朵疼得要命，可心里美滋滋的。

As the school quieted down Tom made an honest effort to study, but the turmoil within him was too great. In turn he took his place in the reading class and made a botch of it; then in the geography class and turned lakes into mountains, mountains into rivers, and rivers into continents, till chaos was come again; then in the spelling class, and got "turned down," by a succession of mere baby words, till he brought up at the foot and yielded up the pewter medal which he had worn with ostentation for months.

班里静下来时，汤姆动起真格来要好好学习，可心里怎么也踏实不下来。结果上朗读课时候弄得乱七八糟的。而在地理课上，他把山脉当成湖泊，湖泊当成河流，河流当成大陆，天地又重回混沌状态了。上拼写课时，一连串最简单的字弄得他“翻了船”，结果成绩在全班垫了底，他只好把那枚白锡奖章退给了老师，那奖章让他风光了好几个月呢。





Chapter 7


第七章

THE harder Tom tried to fasten his mind on his book, the more his ideas wandered. So at last, with a sigh and a yawn, he gave it up. It seemed to him that the noon recess would never come. The air was utterly dead. There was not a breath stirring. It was the sleepiest of sleepy days. The drowsing murmur of the five and twenty studying scholars soothed the soul like the spell that is in the murmur of bees. Away off in the flaming sunshine, Cardiff Hill lifted its soft green sides through a shimmering veil of heat, tinted with the purple of distance; a few birds floated on lazy wing high in the air; no other living thing was visible but some cows, and they were asleep. Tom's heart ached to be free, or else to have something of interest to do to pass the dreary time. His hand wandered into his pocket and his face lit up with a glow of gratitude that was prayer, though he did not know it. Then furtively the percussion-cap box came out. He released the tick and put him on the long flat desk. The creature probably glowed with a gratitude that amounted to prayer, too, at this moment, but it was premature; for when he started thankfully to travel off, Tom turned him aside with a pin and made him take a new direction.

汤姆越想集中注意力看书，脑子就越分神。所以最后他叹了口气，打了个哈欠，放弃了。在他看来，中午放学时间总是不到。空气死一般寂静，连呼吸的气息都没有。这是最让人犯困的日子啊。教室里二十五位学生在用功，读书声就像是一群蜜蜂的嗡嗡叫声，让人更觉得安神了。远处赤日炎炎下，卡第夫山从一层薄薄的热浪中升起它那嫩绿的身子，远远的还有一点紫色，几只鸟儿懒洋洋地在天上翱翔。视野里除了一些牛以外没有其他活物了，而且它们都睡着了。汤姆心里恨不得马上去撒欢呢，或者干点其他有意思的事，打发无聊的时间。他摸了摸兜，脸上立刻露出感激的神色，尽管他自己根本没意识到。他悄悄地拿出那个雷管筒子，把扁虱放在那又长又平的桌子上。这小东西大概也正感激汤姆呢，不过高兴得太早了。它刚要满怀感激地逃走，汤姆用大头针扎了它一下，让它改变了方向。

Tom's bosom friend sat next him, suffering just as Tom had been, and now he was deeply and gratefully interested in this entertainment in an instant. This bosom friend was Joe Harper. The two boys were sworn friends all the week, and embattled enemies on Saturdays. Joe took a pin out of his lapel and began to assist in exercising the prisoner. The sport grew in interest momently. Soon Tom said that they were interfering with each other, and neither getting the fullest benefit of the tick. So he put Joe's slate on the desk and drew a line down the middle of it from top to bottom.

汤姆的知心好友就坐在他旁边，一直就跟汤姆一样忍着无聊的课堂。这个玩意儿立刻吸引了他，真是感激有这么个小玩意儿。这个好朋友就是乔·哈帕。这两个朋友平日里是好得没得说，可到了星期六就成了对阵的敌人。乔从衣服的翻领上取下别针，开始帮着操练这个小俘虏。这样玩儿马上有意思多了。不一会汤姆说他们互相干扰，谁也不能玩儿得尽兴。他把乔的写字板放到桌子上，在写字板正中间从上到下划了一条直线。

"Now," said he, "as long as he is on your side you can stir him up and I'll let him alone; but if you let him get away and get on my side, you're to leave him alone as long as I can keep him from crossing over."

他说：“现在只要扁虱在你那边，你就能动它，我绝对不碰。如果你让它跑到我这边了，你就不能动手，只要我能让它一直在我这边，不越界。”

"All right, go ahead; start him up."

“行，开始吧。让它走。”

The tick escaped from Tom, presently, and crossed the equator. Joe harassed him a while, and then he got away and crossed back again. This change of base occurred often. While one boy was worrying the tick with absorbing interest, the other would look on with interest as strong, the two heads bowed together over the slate, and the two souls dead to all things else. At last luck seemed to settle with Joe. The tick tried this, that, and the other course, and got as excited and as anxious as the boys themselves, but time and again just as he would have victory in his very grasp, so to speak, and Tom's fingers would be twitching to begin, Joe's pin would deftly head him off, and keep possession. At last Tom could stand it no longer. The temptation was too strong. So he reached out and lent a hand with his pin. Joe was angry in a moment. Said he:

很快，扁虱就从汤姆这边逃走了，穿过了界线。乔玩了一阵，它就又跑回汤姆那边。这样扁虱经常来回两边跑，所以一个孩子饶有兴趣地玩弄虫子的时候，另一个也看着，兴致头丝毫不减，两个脑袋在写字板上挤在一起，早把周围的事抛到九霄云外了。不过最后乔更幸运。那扁虱这儿走走，那儿走走，然后又换一边走走。它就跟那两个孩子一样兴奋和着急。可是一次又一次，正当它好像是有把握可以获得胜利，汤姆也活动手指准备开始玩儿了，乔就会用大头针灵巧地拨弄它一下，虫子还是在他这边。最后汤姆实在是忍无可忍，诱惑实在太大了。他伸出手去，用别针拨了一下。乔马上不干了。他说：

"Tom, you let him alone."

“汤姆，你别动它。”

"I only just want to stir him up a little, Joe."

“我只是想稍微动动它，乔。”

"No, sir, it ain't fair; you just let him alone."

“不行，这不公平，你不准动它。”

"Blame it, I ain't going to stir him much."

“去你的，我又不是使劲拨它。”

"Let him alone, I tell you."

“告诉你，别去动它。”

"I won't!"

“我不愿意！”

"You shall — he's on my side of the line."

“你得愿意——它在我这边。”

"Look here, Joe Harper, whose is that tick?"

“听着，乔·哈帕，这扁虱是谁的？”

"I don't care whose tick he is — he's on my side of the line, and you shan't touch him."

“我不管是谁的——它在我这边，你就不能动它。”

"Well, I'll just bet I will, though. He's my tick and I'll do what I blame please with him, or die!"

“哼，我就动，怎么着？他是我的，我爱怎么动就怎么动，要不然我跟你玩命！”

A tremendous whack came down on Tom's shoulders, and its duplicate on Joe's; and for the space of two minutes the dust continued to fly from the two jackets and the whole school to enjoy it. The boys had been too absorbed to notice the hush that had stolen upon the school a while before when the master came tiptoeing down the room and stood over them. He had contemplated a good part of the performance before he contributed his bit of variety to it.

汤姆的肩膀上重重挨了一击，乔也一样。有两分钟的功夫，他俩的上衣灰尘直冒，全校的同学们也看起了热闹。两个人争抢得太投入了，根本没注意到教室里突然安静了下来。因为不久之前老师踮着脚走了进来，站在他们跟前。原来在这之前，老师已经看他俩的表演好一阵了。

When school broke up at noon, Tom flew to Becky Thatcher, and whispered in her ear:

中午放学的时候，汤姆跑去找贝基·撒切尔，小声跟她说：

"Put on your bonnet and let on you're going home; and when you get to the corner, give the rest of 'em the slip, and turn down through the lane and come back. I'll go the other way and come it over 'em the same way."

“你把帽子戴上就假装要回家。走到拐角时，就单溜，然后从那巷子再绕回来。我走另一条路，也这样把他们甩开。”

So the one went off with one group of scholars, and the other with another. In a little while the two met at the bottom of the lane, and when they reached the school they had it all to themselves. Then they sat together, with a slate before them, and Tom gave Becky the pencil and held her hand in his, guiding it, and so created another surprising house. When the interest in art began to wane, the two fell to talking. Tom was swimming in bliss. He said:

两个人各自跟着一群同学走了。一会儿之后，他们在巷子尽头会合。回来之后学校只有他们两个人。于是他们坐在一起，面前放着一块写字板，汤姆给贝基一支铅笔，握着她的手教她画画，又画出了一个令人惊叹的房子。画烦了之后，他们俩就开始聊天。汤姆沉浸在幸福之中。他说：

"Do you love rats?"

“你喜欢老鼠吗？”

"No! I hate them!"

“不！我讨厌老鼠！”

"Well, I do, too — live ones. But I mean dead ones, to swing round your head with a string."

“哼，我也讨厌——活老鼠。可我是说死老鼠，用一根线拴着，在头上甩来甩去地玩。”

"No, I don't care for rats much, anyway. What I like is chewing gum."

“不，不管怎么样，我不大喜欢老鼠。我所喜欢的是口香糖。”

"Oh, I should say so! I wish I had some now."

“啊，我也是。要是现在有就好了。”

"Do you? I've got some. I'll let you chew it awhile, but you must give it back to me."

“是吗？我倒有几个。我让你嚼一会儿，不过你要还给我。”

That was agreeable, so they chewed it turn about, and dangled their legs against the bench in excess of contentment.

商量好之后，他俩轮流嚼着口香糖，他们坐在长凳上晃着腿，别提多高兴了。

"Was you ever at a circus?" said Tom.

“你看过马戏吗？”汤姆问。

"Yes, and my pa's going to take me again some time, if I'm good."

“看过，我爸说如果我表现好，以后还要带我去呢。”

"I been to the circus three or four times — lots of times. Church ain't shucks to a circus. There's things going on at a circus all the time. I'm going to be a clown in a circus when I grow up."

“我看过三四次马戏——看过好多次。做礼拜和看马戏相比，算不了什么。看马戏的时候总有好多有意思的事。我打算长大后到马戏团当小丑。”

"Oh, are you! That will be nice. They're so lovely, all spotted up."

“啊，真的吗！那倒不错。小丑特别可爱，满身都是点点。”

"Yes, that's so. And they get slathers of money — most a dollar a day, Ben Rogers says. Say, Becky, was you ever engaged?"

“是，没错。他们能赚大把大把的钞票——差不多一天赚一块，本·罗杰斯说的。嘿，贝基，你订过婚吗？”

"What's that?"

“订婚是什么？”

"Why, engaged to be married."

“哦，订婚就是快要结婚了。”

"No."

“没有。”

"Would you like to?"

“你愿意订婚吗？”

"I reckon so. I don't know. What is it like?"

“我想是愿意的。我不知道。订婚究竟是怎么回事？”

"Like? Why it ain't like anything. You only just tell a boy you won't ever have anybody but him, ever ever ever, and then you kiss and that's all. Anybody can do it."

“怎么回事？也不是怎么回事。你就是告诉一个男孩除了他，永远不和其他人好，永远永远永远。然后接吻，就这样。谁都能干。”

"Kiss? What do you kiss for?"

“接吻？接吻干什么？”

"Why, that, you know, is to — well, they always do that."

“哎，那，你知道，就是——嘿，人家都是那样做的。”

"Everybody?"

“人人都这样？”

"Why, yes, everybody that's in love with each other. Do you remember what I wrote on the slate?"

“哎，对，彼此相爱的人都这样。你还记得我在写字板上写的字吗？”

"Ye-yes."

“记——记得。”

"What was it?"

“写的是什么？”

"I shan't tell you."

“我不告诉你。”

"Shall I tell you?"

“那我告诉你。”

"Ye — yes — but some other time."

“好——好吧——还是以后再说吧。”

"No, now."

“不，现在说。”

"No, not now — tomorrow."

“不行，现在不能说——明天再说吧。”

"Oh, no, now. Please, Becky — I'll whisper it, I'll whisper it ever so easy."

“不，不行，就现在说。求求你，贝基——我小声说，我轻轻地说。”

Becky hesitating, Tom took silence for consent, and passed his arm about her waist and whispered the tale ever so softly, with his mouth close to her ear. And then he added: "Now you whisper it to me — just the same."

贝基正在犹豫，汤姆认为她不说话就是默许了，于是用胳膊搂住她的腰，嘴靠近她的耳朵，轻声细语地讲了那句话。接着他又说：“你现在把刚才那句话跟我说一遍——跟我刚才一样。”

She resisted, for a while, and then said:

她先没答应，然后说：

"You turn your face away so you can't see, and then I will. But you mustn't ever tell anybody — will you, Tom? Now you won't, will you?"

“你把脸转过去，你看不见我我再说。但是你千万不要对别人说，好吗？汤姆，你不对别人说吧！”

"No, indeed, indeed I won't. Now, Becky."

“不说，我保证，保证不说。来吧，贝基。”

He turned his face away. She bent timidly around till her breath stirred his curls and whispered, "I — love — you!"

他把脸转过去。她怯生生地弯下腰，一直到汤姆的头发都被她的呼吸吹动了，才悄悄地说：“我——爱——你！”

Then she sprang away and ran around and around the desks and benches, with Tom after her, and took refuge in a corner at last, with her little white apron to her face. Tom clasped her about her neck and pleaded:

然后，她就跑开了，围着桌子椅子一圈圈地跑着，汤姆在她后面追，最后她在教室的角落里停了下来，用白色围裙遮住脸。汤姆一把抱紧她的脖子，求她：

"Now, Becky, it's all done — all over but the kiss. Don't you be afraid of that — it ain't anything at all. Please, Becky." And he tugged at her apron and the hands.

“好了，贝基，现在一切都做了——就差接吻了。不要害怕——没什么大不了的。求你了，贝基。”他使劲拉她的围裙和手。

By and by she gave up, and let her hands drop; her face, all glowing with the struggle, came up and submitted. Tom kissed the red lips and said:

渐渐地她让了步，她把手放下来。刚才一阵折腾使她的脸都红了，她抬起头，顺从了汤姆。汤姆吻了她红红的嘴唇，说道：

"Now it's all done, Becky. And always after this, you know, you ain't ever to love anybody but me, and you ain't ever to marry anybody but me, ever never and forever. Will you?"

“好了，贝基，该做的都做了。要知道，从今往后除了我以外不许爱别人，只能嫁给我不能和别人结婚，永远、永远不变，好吗？”

"No, I'll never love anybody but you, Tom, and I'll never marry anybody but you — and you ain't to ever marry anybody but me, either."

“好的。汤姆，我只跟你相爱，不爱别人，我只嫁给你，不和别人结婚——你也一样除了我不能娶别人。”

"Certainly. Of course. That's part of it. And always coming to school or when we're going home, you're to walk with me, when there ain't anybody looking — and you choose me and I choose you at parties, because that's the way you do when you're engaged."

“对对，当然。还有，平时我们在上学或放学的时候，要是没有别人在场的话，你就和我一块走——开舞会的时候，你选我做伴，我选你做伴，因为订了婚的人都是这样的。”

"It's so nice. I never heard of it before."

“真是太有意思了。我以前还从没听说过。”

"Oh, it's ever so gay! Why, me and Amy Lawrence —"

“啊，这才有趣哪！嘿，我和艾美·劳伦斯——”

The big eyes told Tom his blunder and he stopped, confused.

贝基睁大了的两只眼睛让汤姆意识到自己已铸成了大错，于是他住了口，有点不知所措的样子。

"Oh, Tom! Then I ain't the first you've ever been engaged to!"

“啊，汤姆！我不是头一个和你订婚的呀！”

The child began to cry. Tom said:

这小女孩开始哭了起来。汤姆说：

"Oh, don't cry, Becky, I don't care for her any more."

“哦，贝基，不要哭，我已经不再喜欢她了。”

"Yes, you do, Tom — you know you do."

“哼，你喜欢她，汤姆——你心里有数。”

Tom tried to put his arm about her neck, but she pushed him away and turned her face to the wall, and went on crying. Tom tried again, with soothing words in his mouth, and was repulsed again. Then his pride was up, and he strode away and went outside. He stood about, restless and uneasy, for a while, glancing at the door, every now and then, hoping she would repent and come to find him. But she did not. Then he began to feel badly and fear that he was in the wrong. It was a hard struggle with him to make new advances, now, but he nerved himself to it and entered. She was still standing back there in the corner, sobbing, with her face to the wall. Tom's heart smote him. He went to her and stood a moment, not knowing exactly how to proceed. Then he said hesitatingly:

汤姆想伸出胳膊去搂她的脖子，可是被她推开了。她转脸对着墙，继续哭着。汤姆又试了一次，嘴里还讲着好话，可是她还是不理他。这一下伤了他的面子，于是他大步流星，来到外面。他在附近站了一会儿，心乱如麻，十分着急，不时地朝门口瞅一瞅，希望她会后悔，出来找他。可是她没有。这样他渐渐觉得不对劲，害怕自己真的犯了错。这时候经过了一番激烈的思想斗争，他鼓起勇气，走进教室去认错。她还站在教室后面的拐角处，脸冲着墙，哭啊哭的。汤姆的良心上过不去了。他走到她身旁站了一会，不知道说什么好。然后他犹豫地说：

"Becky, I — I don't care for anybody but you."

“贝基，我不喜欢别人，只喜欢你。”

No reply — but sobs.

没有应声——只有抽泣。

"Becky" — pleadingly. "Becky, won't you say something?"

“贝基，”——汤姆恳求道，“贝基，你说话好不好？”

More sobs.

贝基抽泣得更厉害。

Tom got out his chiefest jewel, a brass knob from the top of an andiron, and passed it around her so that she could see it, and said:

汤姆把他最珍贵的宝贝，一个壁炉柴架顶上的铜把手，拿出来从她背后绕过去给她看，说：

"Please, Becky, won't you take it?"

“求求你了，贝基，拿着这个好不好？”

She struck it to the floor. Then Tom marched out of the house and over the hills and far away, to return to school no more that day. Presently Becky began to suspect. She ran to the door; he was not in sight; she flew around to the play yard; he was not there. Then she called:

她一把将铜把手打翻在地。于是汤姆大步流星走出教室，翻过小山，走得很远了。他那天不打算再回学校了。很快贝基心里开始七上八下。她跑到门口，没有看见他。她又飞奔到操场，他也不在。于是，她就喊：

"Tom! Come back, Tom!"

“汤姆！回来吧，汤姆！”

She listened intently, but there was no answer. She had no companions but silence and loneliness. So she sat down to cry again and upbraid herself; and by this time the scholars began to gather again, and she had to hide her griefs and still her broken heart and take up the cross of a long, dreary, aching afternoon, with none among the strangers about her to exchange sorrows with.

她定神听了听，可是没有回答。伴随她的只有寂寞和孤独。她坐下又哭起来，边哭边埋怨自己。这时候同学们又陆陆续续地来上学了，她只得藏起自己的悲伤和心碎。周围的陌生人中，没有人替她分忧解愁。她只好熬过那漫长，乏味，痛苦不堪的下午。





Chapter 8


第八章

TOM dodged hither and thither through lanes until he was well out of the track of returning scholars, and then fell into a moody jog. He crossed a small "branch" two or three times, because of a prevailing juvenile superstition that to cross water baffled pursuit. Half an hour later he was disappearing behind the Douglas mansion on the summit of Cardiff Hill, and the schoolhouse was hardly distinguishable away off in the valley behind him. He entered a dense wood, picked his pathless way to the center of it, and sat down on a mossy spot under a spreading oak. There was not even a zephyr stirring; the dead noonday heat had even stilled the songs of the birds; nature lay in a trance that was broken by no sound but the occasional far-off hammering of a woodpecker, and this seemed to render the pervading silence and sense of loneliness the more profound. The boy's soul was steeped in melancholy; his feelings were in happy accord with his surroundings. He sat long with his elbows on his knees and his chin in his hands, meditating. It seemed to him that life was but a trouble, at best, and he more than half envied Jimmy Hodges, so lately released; it must be very peaceful, he thought, to lie and slumber and dream forever and ever, with the wind whispering through the trees and caressing the grass and the flowers over the grave, and nothing to bother and grieve about, ever any more. If he only had a clean Sunday-school record he could be willing to go, and be done with it all. Now as to this girl. What had he done? Nothing. He had meant the best in the world, and been treated like a dog — like a very dog. She would be sorry some day — maybe when it was too late. Ah, if he could only die temporarily!

汤姆东躲西闪地穿过几条巷子，直到他已经完全不在同学们返校的路线上，然后就开始闷闷不乐地慢跑起来。他横渡了一条小的“支流”两到三次，因为一个盛行的幼稚迷信认为横渡水域可以迷惑追赶的人。半小时后，他渐渐消失在卡第夫山顶上道格拉斯宅邸的后面，而学校校舍远远地落在他身后的山谷里，也几乎分辨不出来了。他走进一片茂密的树林，特意挑没人走过的地方，来到了林子的中心，后坐在一棵枝干伸展的橡树下满是青苔的地方。那里连一丝清风都没有，静止的午间热气甚至让鸟儿都停止了歌唱，大自然处于一种昏睡的状态，只是偶尔被远处啄木鸟发出的敲打声打破，而这却似乎使得蔓延的寂静和孤独感越发深了。这个男孩的灵魂已经深深浸入忧郁之中，他的感觉也同周围的环境十分协调。他久久地坐着，两肘撑在膝盖上，手托着下巴，沉思着。似乎对于他来说，生活充其量只是个困境。他越来越羡慕吉米·赫杰斯，这么快就解脱了。那样一定很安宁吧，他想，就躺着在那睡觉、做梦一直到永远，听风沙沙地穿过树林，吻着坟头的草和花，什么也不用去烦恼和悲伤，永远也不用。要是他有一个没有处罚记录的主日学校档案，他就可以欣然离去，结束一切了。至于那个女孩，他干了什么呢？什么也没干。他本怀着世上最大的善心，可是却被她用待狗的方式对待——简直就是把他当成一只狗。她会后悔的，总有一天——可能当一切都太晚的时候。啊，如果他能就暂时地死一下就好了！

But the elastic heart of youth cannot be compressed into one constrained shape long at a time. Tom presently began to drift insensibly back into the concerns of this life again. What if he turned his back, now, and disappeared mysteriously? What if he went away — ever so far away, into unknown countries beyond the seas — and never came back any more! How would she feel then! The idea of being a clown recurred to him now, only to fill him with disgust. For frivolity and jokes and spotted tights were an offense, when they intruded themselves upon a spirit that was exalted into the vague august realm of the romantic. No, he would be a soldier, and return after long years, all warworn and illustrious. No — better still, he would join the Indians, and hunt buffaloes and go on the warpath in the mountain ranges and the trackless great plains of the Far West, and away in the future come back a great chief, bristling with feathers, hideous with paint, and prance into Sunday school, some drowsy summer morning, with a bloodcurdling war whoop, and sear the eyeballs of all his companions with unappeasable envy. But now, there was something gaudier even than this. He would be a pirate! That was it! Now his future lay plain before him, and glowing with unimaginable splendor. How his name would fill the world, and make people shudder! How gloriously he would go plowing the dancing seas, in his long, low, black-hulled racer, the Spirit of the Storm, with his grisly flag flying at the fore!

但是轻松灵活的年轻人的心是不可能一下子被长时间塞进一个压抑的状态的。汤姆马上又开始不知不觉地游离回对此生的担心之中了。要是他转过身，就现在，然后神秘地消失，那会怎样呢？要是他离开这——从未有过的远远地离开，到不知名的、海那头的国家去——再也不回来，那会怎样呢！她到那时候又会怎么想！那个关于自己是个小丑的念头在他面前重现，但仅仅让他充满了厌恶感。因为轻浮、玩笑、带圆点的紧身衣是种冒犯，它们打扰了汤姆的情绪，它正慢慢升入隐约而神圣的浪漫王国的领地。不，他要当一名士兵，在很久很久之后回来，带着满身的伤痕并且无比的光荣。不，比这更好的是，他会加入印第安人的队伍，然后猎捕野牛，踏上绵延山间的征战之路和西部人迹罕至的平原。将来当他回来时已经是一个酋长，头上插着的羽毛根根竖立，涂着油彩的脸很狰狞，然后他昂然阔步走进主日学校，在个令人瞌睡的夏天早晨，来声令人毛骨悚然的战时嚎叫，让他的伙伴们的眼珠因为不可抑制的羡慕而烧灼。但现在，还有比这更华丽精彩的呢。他要当一个海盗！就是这样！现在他的未来在他眼前展现，闪着不可想象的华丽光晕。他的名字全世界都会知道，让人们颤抖。多光荣啊，他将在翻滚海上乘风破浪，乘着他那又长又矮、船体漆黑的快艇“风暴神”，而他那骇人的旗子将在船头飘扬。

And at the zenith of his fame, how he would suddenly appear at the old village and stalk into church, brown and weather-beaten, in his black velvet doublet and trunks, his great jackboots, his crimson sash, his belt bristling with horse pistols, his crime-rusted cutlass at his side, his slouch hat with waving plumes, his black flag unfurled, with the skull and crossbones on it, and hear with swelling ecstasy the whisperings, "It's Tom Sawyer the Pirate! — the Black Avenger of the Spanish Main!"

然后当他名声大震时，他会突然出现在这古老的村子，大步走进教堂。他晒得黝黑，饱经风霜，穿着一套黑丝绒衣裤，脚蹬一双肥大长筒靴，佩着他的猩红肩带，腰带上别着马枪，旁边挂着杀人杀到生锈的短剑。他的垂边帽子上飘着羽毛，他的黑旗招展着，上面有着骷髅头和交叉的白骨。然后当他听到别人悄声低语：“这就是海盗汤姆·索亚——西班牙主海面上的黑衣复仇者！”时，会不禁狂喜。

Yes, it was settled; his career was determined. He would run away from home and enter upon it. He would start the very next morning. Therefore he must now begin to get ready. He would collect his resources together. He went to a rotten log near at hand and began to dig under one end of it with his Barlow knife. He soon struck wood that sounded hollow. He put his hand there and uttered this incantation impressively:

对，就这么定了，他的职业确定了。他要离家出走，然后去过这种生活。他在第二天就要开始行动。因此他必须现在就作准备。他将带上他所有的家当。他走到近在手边的一棵烂树干那，然后开始用他的巴露折刀在它一头开挖起来。他不一会就触到了木头，听起来空洞洞的。他把手放在那，有模有样地念着如下咒语：

"What hasn't come here, come! What's here, stay here!"

“还没有来这儿的，快来！已经在这儿的，留在这！”

Then he scraped away the dirt, and exposed a pine shingle. He took it up and disclosed a shapely little treasure house whose bottom and sides were of shingles. In it lay a marble. Tom's astonishment was boundless! He scratched his head with a perplexed air, and said:

接着他刮去泥土，露出一块松木瓦块。他把它拿起来，露出一个均匀好看的小宝箱来，它底部和四面都是松木瓦块制的。里面躺着一个弹子。汤姆大为惊讶！他挠着头，带着一种困惑的神情说：

"Well, that beats anything!"

“嘿，这太奇怪了！”

Then he tossed the marble away pettishly, and stood of tom sawyer cogitating. The truth was, that a superstition of his had failed, here, which he and all his comrades had always looked upon as infallible. If you buried a marble with certain necessary incantations, and left it alone a fortnight, and then opened the place with the incantation he had just used, you would find that all the marbles you had ever lost had gathered themselves together there, meantime, no matter how widely they had been separated. But now, this thing had actually and unquestionably failed. Tom's whole structure of faith was shaken to its foundations. He had many a time heard of this thing succeeding, but never of its failing before. It did not occur to him that he had tried it several times before, himself, but could never find the hiding places afterward. He puzzled over the matter some time, and finally decided that some witch had interfered and broken the charm. He thought he would satisfy himself on that point; so he searched around till he found a small sandy spot with a little funnel-shaped depression in it. He laid himself down and put his mouth close to this depression and called:

然后他生气地扔掉那个弹子，站在那儿汤姆索亚式地仔细思考着。事实是，他的一个迷信在这里失灵了，可他和他所有的伙伴一向都认为它是万无一失的啊。如果在你埋下一个弹子时念上必要的咒语，放它在那两周后再用他刚说过的咒语去挖弹子，你会发现：所有你原来丢失的弹子这时都已经聚到这个地方了，不管它们散落在多远的地方。可是现在，它却真的、毫无疑问地失败了。汤姆的整个信仰体系从根基上被动摇了。他以前多次听说过它成功，却从没听说过它失灵。他没意识到，他以前已经亲自尝试过很多次了，但从没能够在事后找到埋藏的地点。他在这事上困惑了好一阵子，最后认定是某个巫婆捣了乱，破了咒语。他觉得自己可以满足于这样解释。于是他在周围搜寻直到找到一小块中间有个小漏斗形凹陷的沙地。他趴地上，嘴紧贴着凹陷处喊道：

"Doodlebug, doodlebug, tell me what I want to know! Doodlebug, doodlebug, tell me what I want to know!"

“小甲虫，小甲虫，告诉我我想知道的事！小甲虫，小甲虫，告诉我我想知道的事！”

The sand began to work, and presently a small black bug appeared for a second and then darted under again in a fright.

沙子开始动起来，出现了一只黑色小甲虫，可过一秒，又被吓得缩了回去。

"He dasn't tell! So it was a witch that done it. I just knowed it."

“它不说！所以这事是个巫婆做的我就知道是这样。”

He well knew the futility of trying to contend against witches, so he gave up discouraged. But it occurred to him that he might as well have the marble he had just thrown away, and therefore he went and made a patient search for it. But he could not find it. Now he went back to his treasure house and carefully placed himself just as he had been standing when he tossed the marble away; then he took another marble from his pocket and tossed it in the same way, saying:

他十分清楚试图和巫婆斗只将是徒劳，于是他备受打击地放弃了。但是他忽然又意识到他最好还是留着刚才扔掉的那颗石子，于是他跑去耐心地寻找它。可是他没能找到。现在，他已经回到他的小宝箱旁，小心翼翼地让自己站在刚才扔弹子的地方。接着他从口袋里又掏出一个弹子，用同样的方式扔出去，嘴里还说道：

"Brother, go find your brother!"

“老兄，去找你的兄弟吧！”

He watched where it stopped, and went there and looked. But it must have fallen short or gone too far; so he tried twice more. The last repetition was successful. The two marbles lay within a foot of each other.

他看到它落在什么地方，接着走过去查看。但是弹子一定是扔得太近或太远，所以他又试了两回。最后一次成功了。两个弹子躺在距彼此不到一英尺的地方。

Just here the blast of a toy tin trumpet came faintly down the green aisles of the forest. Tom flung off his jacket and trousers, turned a suspender into a belt, raked away some brush behind the rotten log, disclosing a rude bow and arrow, a lath sword and a tin trumpet, and in a moment had seized these things and bounded away, barelegged, with fluttering shirt. He presently halted under a great elm, blew an answering blast, and then began to tiptoe and look warily out, this way and that. He said cautiously — to an imaginary company:

就在这时，一阵锡皮玩具喇叭发出的声音隐隐约约从森林里的绿色林荫道上传来。汤姆迅速地脱掉夹克和裤子，把背带改成腰带，拨开一些朽木后面的灌木丛，找出一副简陋的弓箭，一把木片的剑和一只锡皮喇叭。片刻之间他就抓着这些东西跳出去了，赤着脚，衣衫飘动。他不久就在一颗大榆树底下停下来，吹了一声喇叭作为回应，然后开始踮着脚警觉地向外望，这边看看，那边看看。他谨慎地——对想象中的同伴说：

"Hold, my merry men! Keep hid till I blow."

“稳住，我的兄弟们！藏着直到我吹号。”

Now appeared Joe Harper, as airily clad and elaborately armed as Tom. Tom called:

这时，乔·哈帕出现了，穿得很凉快、带着精细复杂的装备——和汤姆一样。汤姆喊道：

"Hold! Who comes here into Sherwood Forest without my pass?"

“站住！来的是什么人，不经我的许可竟敢闯进谢伍德森林？”

"Guy of Guisborne wants no man's pass. Who art thou that — that —"

“我是皇家卫士戈次勃恩的兄弟，自然不用许可。你是何人，竟敢——竟敢……”

"Dares to hold such language," said Tom, prompting — for they talked "by the book," from memory.

“竟敢口出狂言，”汤姆提示着哈帕说，因为他们在按“那本书”说话，所以得全靠记忆背出来。

"Who art thou that dares to hold such language?"

“你是何人，竟敢口出狂言？”

"I, indeed! I am Robin Hood, as thy caitiff carcase soon shall know."

“我，实际上，我乃罗宾汉是也，你这卑鄙的匹夫马上就会知道我的厉害。”

"Then art thou indeed that famous outlaw? Right gladly will I dispute with thee the passes of the merry wood. Have at thee!"

“这么说来，你真的是那位有名的绿林好汉喽？现在我很乐意与你较量较量，看看这林中乐土归谁所有。接招！”

They took their lath swords, dumped their other traps on the ground, struck a fencing attitude, foot to foot, and began a grave, careful combat, "two up and two down." Presently Tom said:

他们拿起各自的木片剑，把身上其他的东西都扔到地上，做出一个击剑的姿势，脚对脚，然后开始了一场严肃而小心翼翼的战斗，叫做“两上两下”。随即，汤姆说：

"Now, if you've got the hang, go it lively!"

“听着，你要是懂得剑法，我们就痛痛快快地比一比吧！”

So they "went it lively," panting and perspiring with the work. By and by Tom shouted:

于是他们就“痛痛快快地比”，弄得气喘吁吁、汗流浃背。不久后，汤姆嚷道：

"Fall! fall! Why don't you fall?"

“倒下！倒下！你怎么不倒下呀？”

"I shan't! Why don't you fall yourself ? You're getting the worst of it."

“我不干！你自己怎么不倒下呀？你招架不住了。”

"Why, that ain't anything. I can't fall; that ain't the way it is in the book. The book says, 'Then with one backhanded stroke he slew poor Guy of Guisborne.' You're to turn around and let me hit you in the back."

“嘿，那不算什么。我不能倒，这可不是书上说的那样。书上说，‘接着反手一剑，他就把可怜的戈次勃恩的兄弟刺死了。’你应该转过身去，让我一剑刺中你的后背才对。”

There was no getting around the authorities, so Joe turned, received the whack and fell.

因为没办法推翻书的权威，于是乔只好转过身去，挨了重重的一击，倒在地上。

"Now," said Joe, getting up, "you got to let me kill you. That's fair."

“听着，”乔说着从地上爬起来，“你得让我把你杀掉，那才公平。”

"Why, I can't do that, it ain't in the book."

“嘿，那怎么行呢？书上又没这么说。”

"Well, it's blamed mean — that's all."

“得了，你真是小气的不得了——不玩了。”

"Well, say, Joe, you can be Friar Tuck or Much the miller's son, and lam me with a quarterstaff; or I'll be the Sheriff of Nottingham and you be Robin Hood a little while and kill me."

“喂，我说乔，你可以扮演达克修士或是磨坊主的儿子马奇，拿一根铁头木棍打我一顿，或者我来扮诺丁汉的行政司法官，你扮一会儿罗宾汉，把我杀死也行。”

This was satisfactory, and so these adventures were carried out. Then Tom became Robin Hood again, and was allowed by the treacherous nun to bleed his strength away through his neglected wound. And at last Joe, representing a whole tribe of weeping outlaws, dragged him sadly forth, gave his bow into his feeble hands, and Tom said, "Where this arrow falls, there bury poor Robin Hood under the greenwood tree." Then he shot the arrow and fell back and would have died, but he lit on a nettle and sprang up too gaily for a corpse.

这主意倒令人满意，于是这些冒险展开了。后来汤姆又一次扮演罗宾汉，他让那个阴险的尼姑给害了，失血太多，耗尽了精力。最后，乔扮演了一伙哭哭啼啼绿林好汉，悲伤地拖着他前进，把他的弓递到他那双软弱无力的手里，然后汤姆就说了：“这箭落下的地方，埋着可怜的绿林中的罗宾汉。”然后他射出那支箭，身体往后一仰，应该是要死了，可他倒在荨麻上，接着弹起来起来，对于一具死尸来说那样子过于快活了。

The boys dressed themselves, hid their accouterments, and went off grieving that there were no outlaws any more, and wondering what modern civilization could claim to have done to compensate for their loss. They said they would rather be outlaws a year in Sherwood Forest than President of the United States forever.

两个孩子穿戴好衣帽，藏起他们的装备，离开时因为现在已经没有绿林好汉而伤心，并且很想知道现代文明中有什么是称得上能够弥补这一缺陷的。他们说宁可在谢伍德森林里当一年绿林好汉，也不愿意永远当美国总统。





Chapter 9


第九章

AT half past nine, that night, Tom and Sid were sent to bed, as usual. They said their prayers, and Sid was soon asleep. Tom lay awake and waited, in restless impatience. When it seemed to him that it must be nearly daylight, he heard the clock strike ten! This was despair. He would have tossed and fidgeted, as his nerves demanded, but he was afraid he might wake Sid. So he lay still, and stared up into the dark. Everything was dismally still. By and by, out of the stillness, little, scarcely perceptible noises began to emphasize themselves. The ticking of the clock began to bring itself into notice. Old beams began to crack mysteriously. The stairs creaked faintly. Evidently spirits were abroad. A measured, muffled snore issued from Aunt Polly's chamber. And now the tiresome chirping of a cricket that no human ingenuity could locate, began. Next the ghastly ticking of a deathwatch in the wall at the bed's head made Tom shudder — it meant that somebody's days were numbered. Then the howl of a far-off dog rose on the night air, and was answered by a fainter howl from a remoter distance. Tom was in an agony. At last he was satisfied that time had ceased and eternity begun; he began to doze, in spite of himself; the clock chimed eleven, but he did not hear it. And then there came, mingling with his half-formed dreams, a most melancholy caterwauling. The raising of a neighboring window disturbed him. A cry of "Scat! you devil!" and the crash of an empty bottle against the back of his aunt's woodshed brought him wide awake, and a single minute later he was dressed and out of the window and creeping along the roof of the "ell" on all fours. He "meow'd" with caution once or twice, as he went; then jumped to the roof of the woodshed and thence to the ground. Huckleberry Finn was there, with his dead cat. The boys moved off and disappeared in the gloom. At the end of half an hour they were wading through the tall grass of the graveyard.

9点半钟那天晚上，汤姆和希德被吩咐上床睡觉，一如往常。他们做完祷告，希德很快就睡着了。汤姆躺在那醒着，等着，十分不耐烦。当他觉得天似乎快要亮时，才听到钟敲十下！这太让人失望了。他很想翻翻身，动一动，顺应下神经的需要，可是他害怕自己也许会吵醒希德，于是他直直地躺着，向上看着黑暗的地方。一切都静得令人沮丧。渐渐的 ，在那一片寂静中，小小的，几乎听不出来的动静渐渐地大了起来。渐渐可以注意到时钟的滴答声。老旧的屋梁也开始神秘地发出裂开的声响。楼梯在微微地吱嘎作响。很明显，鬼怪们出来了。一阵均匀的、沉闷的鼾声从波莉姨妈卧室里传来。这时一阵令人心烦的蟋蟀叫声开始了。即使是人最灵敏的感官也不能发觉它在什么地方。接着床头的墙里一只小蛀虫发出一阵恐怖的踢踏声，使汤姆吓得发抖——这意味着某个人的日子不多了。然后，远处一只狗的叫声升起在夜晚的空气中，并被一阵微弱的更远处的狗叫声呼应着。汤姆在极度的痛苦之中。最后，他满足于时间的停止，永恒的开始。他开始不知不觉地打起盹来，钟敲了十一下，他也没有听见。后来伴着他快做成的梦，外面传来一阵非常凄惨的猫儿叫春声。附近一个窗户被打开的声音惊动了他。一声“滚！你这恶棍！”的骂声和一只空瓶子砸到他的姨妈的木棚小屋背面的声音使他完全清醒过来，一分钟之内，他便穿好了衣服，从窗户出来，爬行在那个“厢房”的屋顶上。他一边小心地“咪呜”了一两次，一边爬着；然后跳上了木棚小屋的屋顶，再跳到地上。哈克贝利·费恩早已等候在那里，手里拿着他那只死猫。两个男孩走开了，一起消失在黑暗中。半小时之后，他俩就穿行在坟地里的深草丛中。

It was a graveyard of the old-fashioned Western kind. It was on a hill, about a mile and a half from the village. It had a crazy board fence around it, which leaned inward in places, and outward the rest of the time, but stood upright nowhere. Grass and weeds grew rank over the whole cemetery. All the old graves were sunken in, there was not a tombstone on the place; round-topped, worm-eaten boards staggered over the graves, leaning for support and finding none. "Sacred to the memory of " So-and-So had been painted on them once, but it could no longer have been read, on the most of them, now, even if there had been light.

这是一个老式的西部坟地，它坐落在一个小山上，离村子大约一点五英里。它周围有一道歪歪斜斜的木板栅栏，有些地方往里倒，剩下的往外斜，总之，没有一个地方是笔直的。杂草长满了整个墓地，所有的旧坟都塌陷下去，坟上连一块墓碑都没有。圆顶的、虫蛀的木牌子歪插在坟墓上，倾斜着像在找支柱，却找不到。“纪念某某”之类的字样曾经写在这些牌子上，但是大多数上的字就算现在有亮光已看不清了。

A faint wind moaned through the trees, and Tom feared it might be the spirits of the dead, complaining at being disturbed. The boys talked little, and only under their breath, for the time and the place and the pervading solemnity and silence oppressed their spirits. They found the sharp new heap they were seeking, and ensconced themselves within the protection of three great elms that grew in a bunch within a few feet of the grave.

一阵微风呼呼地吹过树林，但汤姆怕那可能是死人的鬼魂在抱怨被打扰。两个孩子没怎么说话，就是说也只敢悄悄地说，因为此时此地，到处是一片肃穆和寂静，使他们很压抑。他们找到了要找的那座新隆起的坟，然后藏身于三棵长成一捆的大榆树下，离坟只有几英尺远。

Then they waited in silence for what seemed a long time. The hooting of a distant owl was all the sound that troubled the dead stillness. Tom's reflections grew oppressive. He must force some talk. So he said in a whisper:

他们静静地等了似乎很长一段时间，远处猫头鹰的叫声是唯一搅动了那死般寂静的声音。汤姆越来越抑郁，他必须制造些谈话，于是他低声问道：

"Hucky, do you believe the dead people like it for us to be here?"

“哈奇，你认为死人会愿意我们到这儿来吗？”

Huckleberry whispered:

哈克贝利低声说：

"I wisht I knowed. It's awful solemn like, ain't it?"

“我要是知道就好了。这里肃静得吓人，是不是？”

"I bet it is."

“是啊。”

There was a considerable pause, while the boys canvassed this matter inwardly. Then Tom whispered:

然后是一阵停顿，男孩们各自都在心里细想着这件事。接着汤姆悄悄地说：

"Say, Hucky — do you reckon Hoss Williams hears us talking?"

“喂，我说哈奇——你猜霍斯·威廉斯听得见我们讲话吗？”

"O' course he does. Least his sperrit does."

“他当然听得见。至少他的阴魂能听见。”

Tom, after a pause:

汤姆停了一会才说：

"I wish I'd said Mister Williams. But I never meant any harm. Everybody calls him Hoss."

“我刚才提到他时，要是带上了‘先生’二字就好了。不过我并不是故意不尊敬他。别人都叫他霍斯。”

"A body can't be too partic'lar how they talk 'bout these-yer dead people, Tom."

“议论这几年才死的人时要特别小心才行啊，汤姆。”

This was a damper, and conversation died again.

这句话犹如一盆冷水，而谈话也中断了。

Presently Tom seized his comrade's arm and said:

不一会，汤姆抓住哈克的胳膊说道：

"Sh!"

“嘘！”

"What is it, Tom?" And the two clung together with beating hearts.

“怎么啦，汤姆？”他们俩紧紧靠在一起，心怦怦直跳。

"Sh! There 'tis again! Didn't you hear it?"

“嘘！又来了！你没有听见吗？”

"I —"

“我——”

"There! Now you hear it."

“听！现在听见了吧。”

"Lord, Tom, they're coming! They're coming, sure. What'll we do?"

“天啊，汤姆，他们来了，他们来了，真的！我们怎么办啊？”

"I dono. Think they'll see us?"

“我不知道。你觉得他们会看见我们吗？”

"Oh, Tom, they can see in the dark, same as cats. I wisht I hadn't come."

“哦，汤姆，他们在黑暗中看得见，就像猫一样。我真希望我没有来这。”

"Oh, don't be afeard. I don't believe they'll bother us. We ain't doing any harm. If we keep perfectly still, maybe they won't notice us at all."

“啊，不要害怕。我想他们不会来找我们的麻烦。我们又没惹他们。如果我们一动也不动，也许他们根本不会发现我们。”

"I'll try to, Tom, but Lord, I'm all of a shiver."

“我会试着不动的，汤姆，可是天啊，我浑身直发抖哩。”

"Listen!"

“听！”

The boys bent their heads together and scarcely breathed. A muffled sound of voices floated up from the far end of the graveyard.

两个孩子低着头靠在一起，屏住呼吸。一阵低沉的说话声从远远的坟地那边传来。

"Look! See there!" whispered Tom. "What is it?"

“瞧！瞧那！”汤姆小声说，“那是什么？”

"It's devil-fire. Oh, Tom, this is awful."

“是鬼火。哦，汤姆，这太吓人了。”

Some vague figures approached through the gloom, swinging an old-fashioned tin lantern that freckled the ground with innumerable little spangles of light. Presently Huckleberry whispered with a shudder:

几个模模糊糊的影子穿过黑暗走过来，摇晃着一盏老式锡制灯笼，地上被照得光点斑斑。哈克马上颤抖地说：

"It's the devils, sure enough. Three of 'em! Lordy, Tom, we're goners! Can you pray?"

“鬼来了，一定是的，一共有三个！天啊，汤姆，我们死定了！你还能祷告吗？”

"I'll try, but don't you be afeard. They ain't going to hurt us. Now I lay me down to sleep, I —'"

“我来试试，不过你别怕。他们不会害我们的。‘现在我躺下睡觉，我——’”

"Sh!"

“嘘！”

"What is it, Huck?"

“怎么啦，哈克？”

"They're humans! One of 'em is, anyway. One of 'em's old Muff Potter's voice."

“他们是人！有一个是的，不管怎样。有一个有莫夫·波特老头的声音。”

"No — 'tain't so, is it?"

“不——不是他的声音，对吧？”

"I bet I know it. Don't you stir nor budge. He ain't sharp enough to notice us. Drunk, the same as usual, likely — blamed old rip!"

“我敢打赌我认得那声音，你别移也别动。他没那么机敏，不会看见我们的。喝醉了，和往常一样，这很有可能——这个该死无用的老东西！”

"All right, I'll keep still. Now they're stuck. Can't find it. Here they come again. Now they're hot. Cold again. Hot again. Red hot! They're p'inted right, this time. Say, Huck, I know another o' them voices; it's Injun Joe."

“好吧，我一定保持安静。现在他们不走了。找不到他们了。瞧他们又来了。现在他们来劲了。又泄气了。又来劲了。劲头十足！他们这回找对了方向。喂，哈克，我听出了另一个人的声音，那是印第安·乔。”

"That's so — that murderin' half-breed! I'd druther they was devils a dern sight. What kin they be up to?"

“不错，是那个杀人不眨眼的杂种！我倒情愿他们都是鬼，鬼都比他们好得多。他们能打什么坏主意呢？

The whisper died wholly out, now, for the three men had reached the grave and stood within a few feet of the boys' hiding place.

耳语渐渐地停止了，因为这时那三个人来到坟边站着，离孩子们藏身之处还不到几英尺。

"Here it is," said the third voice; and the owner of it held the lantern up and revealed the face of young Dr. Robinson.

“到了。”第三个声音说，声音的主人举起灯笼，灯光下现出了年轻的医生鲁宾逊的面孔。

Potter and Injun Joe were carrying a handbarrow with a rope and a couple of shovels on it. They cast down their load and began to open the grave. The doctor put the lantern at the head of the grave and came and sat down with his back against one of the elm trees. He was so close the boys could have touched him.

波特和印第安·乔推着一个手推车，车上有一根绳子和两把铁锹。他们把车上的东西卸下来，开始挖墓。医生把灯笼放在坟头上，走过来坐下，倚着榆树中的一棵。他离得那样近，两个孩子伸手就能碰到他。

"Hurry, men!" he said in a low voice; "the moon might come out at any moment."

“挖快点，伙计们！”他低声说，“月亮随时都可能出来。”

They growled a response and went on digging. For some time there was no noise but the grating sound of the shovels discharging their freight of mould and gravel. It was very monotonous. Finally a spade struck upon the coffin with a dull woody accent, and within another minute or two the men had hoisted it out on the ground. They pried off the lid with their shovels, got out the body and dumped it rudely on the ground. The moon drifted from behind the clouds and exposed the pallid face. The barrow was got ready and the corpse placed on it, covered with a blanket, and bound to its place with the rope. Potter took out a large spring-knife and cut off the dangling end of the rope and then said:

他们吼着回应了一声后继续挖掘着。有一段时间，只有他们那嚓嚓地抛卸满锹的泥土和石子的声音。那声音非常单调。终于有一把铁锹碰到了棺材，发出了低沉的木头声音。一两分钟后，那两个人就把棺材抬出来放在地上了。他们用铁锹撬开棺盖，把尸体弄出来，粗鲁地把它扔到地上。月亮从云朵后面浮现出来，照亮了尸体苍白的脸。推车准备好后，尸体被放了上去，还盖上毯子，用绳子捆好。波特拿出一把大弹簧刀，割断车上垂下来的绳头，说：

"Now the cussed thing's ready, Sawbones, and you'll just out with another five, or here she stays."

“这该死的东西现在弄好了，医生，你得再拿五块钱，要不然它得留在这。”

"That's the talk!" said Injun Joe . "Look here, what does this mean?" said the doctor. "You required your pay in advance, and I've paid you."

“就是这个意思！”印第安·乔说。“喂，我说，这是什么意思？”医生问道，“你们要求先给钱，我已经给你们了。”

"Yes, and you done more than that," said Injun Joe, approaching the doctor, who was now standing. "Five years ago you drove me away from your father's kitchen one night, when I come to ask for something to eat, and you said I warn't there for any good; and when I swore I'd get even with you if it took a hundred years, your father had me jailed for a vagrant. Did you think I'd forget? The Injun blood ain't in me for nothing. And now I've got you, and you got to settle, you know!"

“不错，不过还远不止这些。”印第安·乔边说，走近站着的医生。“五年前的一个晚上，我到你父亲的厨房讨点吃的，你把我给赶了出来，你还说我到厨房去肯定不怀好意；打那时起，我发誓：我要和你讨回这一账，即便要花上一百年的功夫。你父亲还把我关进牢房，就因为我是无业游民。你以为我会忘吗？我身上印第安人的血也不是白流的，现在你落到我手里，你得为此付出代价，知道吧！”

He was threatening the doctor, with his fist in his face, by this time. The doctor struck out suddenly and stretched the ruffian on the ground. Potter dropped his knife, and exclaimed:

这时，他已经开始威胁医生，在他面前挥舞着拳头。医生突然猛击一拳，将这个恶棍打翻在地，波特扔掉刀，大声喊道：

"Here, now, don't you hit my pard!" and the next moment he had grappled with the doctor and the two were struggling with might and main, trampling the grass and tearing the ground with their heels. Injun Joe sprang to his feet, his eyes flaming with passion, snatched up Potter's knife, and went creeping, catlike and stooping, round and round about the combatants, seeking an opportunity. All at once the doctor flung himself free, seized the heavy headboard of Williams' grave and felled Potter to the earth with it — and in the same instant the half-breed saw his chance and drove the knife to the hilt in the young man's breast. He reeled and fell partly upon Potter, flooding him with his blood, and in the same moment the clouds blotted out the dreadful spectacle and the two frightened boys went speeding away in the dark.

“嘿，你不准打我的朋友！”紧接着，他和医生扭打在一起。两个人全力挣扎，踩踏着地上的草，鞋跟把土都踢起来了。印第安·乔迅速地从地上跳起来，眼里燃烧着怒火，抓起波特扔在地上的那把刀，悄悄地、像猫似的、弯着腰在两个打架的人周围转来转去，寻找着机会。突然医生一下子挣脱出来，抓起威廉斯坟上那块重重的墓碑，一下子把波特打倒在地。与此同时，这个杂种看到了机会，把刀子一下子全捅进了年轻医生的胸膛。医生晃了晃就倒在波特身上，溅了波特一身血。同时乌云遮住了这可怕的惨相，那两个吓坏了的孩子在黑暗中飞速跑掉了。

Presently, when the moon emerged again, Injun Joe was standing over the two forms, contemplating them. The doctor murmured inarticulately, gave a long gasp or two and was still. The half-breed muttered:

不久，当月亮又露出了面，印第安·乔站在那两人的躯壳旁，凝视着他们。医生口齿不清地嘟哝着，长长地喘了一两口气，然后就不动了。那个杂种嘟哝着：

"That score is settled — damn you."

“那笔账就算扯平了——去死吧你。”

Then he robbed the body. After which he put the fatal knife in Potter's open right hand, and sat down on the dismantled coffin. Three — four — five minutes passed, and then Potter began to stir and moan. His hand closed upon the knife; he raised it, glanced at it, and let it fall, with a shudder. Then he sat up, pushing the body from him, and gazed at it, and then around him, confusedly. His eyes met Joe's.

接着他又抢走了尸体身上的东西，之后他将那把杀人的刀放在波特张开的右手里，坐在撬开的棺材上。三——四——五分钟过去了，这时波特才开始动弹，并且呻吟起来。他的手握住了那把刀，他将它举起来，瞥了一眼，刀落到了地上，他打了个冷战。接着他坐起身来，推开压着他的尸体，盯着它看了一会，又往周围望了望，十分迷惑。他的目光碰到了乔的目光。

"Lord, how is this, Joe?" he said.

“天啊，这是怎么回事，乔？”他说。

"It's a dirty business," said Joe, without moving.

“这事糟糕透了，”乔说，动也不动。

"What did you do it for?"

“你干吗要这样干？”

"I! I never done it!"

“我！我可没干这事。”

"Look here! That kind of talk won't wash."

“听着！那种话也改变不了事实。”

Potter trembled and grew white.

波特吓得直抖，脸色变得苍白。

"I thought I'd got sober. I'd no business to drink tonight. But it's in my head yet — worse'n when we started here. I'm all in a muddle; can't recollect anything of it, hardly. Tell me, Joe — honest, now, old feller — did I do it? Joe, I never meant to — 'pon my soul and honor, I never meant to, Joe. Tell me how it was, Joe. Oh, it's awful — and him so young and promising."

“我认为我会醒酒。今晚我本不想喝酒，可是酒劲还在脑子里，比我们来这儿的时候还厉害。我整个人都昏昏沉沉的，回忆不起来任何事情。告诉我，乔，伙计，说老实话，是我干的吗？乔，我根本不想那样干。以我的灵魂和名誉发誓，我根本不想那样干，乔。告诉我这是怎么回事？乔？哦，这太可怕了——他这么年轻、有前途。”

"Why, you two was scuffling, and he fetched you one with the headboard and you fell flat; and then up you come, all reeling and staggering like, and snatched the knife and jammed it into him, just as he fetched you another awful clip — and here you've laid, as dead as a wedge till now."

“嘿，就是你俩扭打起来了，他用墓碑牌子砸了你一下，你就被砸趴下了。接着你爬起来，晃晃悠悠地站不稳，你一把夺过这把刀，一下子捅进他的身体而他又给了你狠狠的一击，于是你就躺在这儿，像块木楔子，一直到现在。”

"Oh, I didn't know what I was a-doing. I wish I may die this minute if I did. It was all on account of the whisky; and the excitement, I reckon. I never used a weepon in my life before, Joe. I've fought, but never with weepons. They'll all say that. Joe, don't tell! Say you won't tell, Joe — that's a good feller. I always liked you, Joe, and stood up for you, too. Don't you remember? You won't tell, will you, Joe?" And the poor creature dropped on his knees before the stolid murderer, and clasped his appealing hands.

“啊，我一点也不知道我都干了些什么。我真希望这一分钟就死掉。这都是因为威士忌在作怪，加上那冲动劲儿，我猜。我从来都没有用过凶器啊，乔。我跟人打过架，可是从来没使过凶器。人们都知道这个。乔，这事你可别说出去！乔，你说你不会说出去，这才够意思啊。我一直都喜欢你，乔，也总是站在你一边的。你难道忘记了吗？你不会讲出去的，对不对，乔？”于是这个可怜的家伙跪倒在那个残忍的凶手面前，双手合掌，祈求他。

"No, you've always been fair and square with me, Muff Potter, and I won't go back on you. There, now, that's as fair as a man can say."

“对。你一向待我不错，莫夫·波特，我不会对不起你的。怎么样，我这样说算是公平合理吧。”

"Oh, Joe, you're an angel. I'll bless you for this the longest day I live." And Potter began to cry.

“啊，乔，你真善良得像个天使。我要祝福你一辈子。”接着波特开始哭起来。

"Come, now, that's enough of that. This ain't any time for blubbering. You be off yonder way and I'll go this. Move, now, and don't leave any tracks behind you."

“哦，得了，不要再说了。现在不是哭鼻子的时候。你从那边走，我从这边走现在就动身，别留下任何脚印。”

Potter started on a trot that quickly increased to a run. The half-breed stood looking after him. He muttered:

波特开始还是小跑，很快就大跑起来。那个杂种站在那儿，看着他的背影，他咕哝道：

"If he's as much stunned with the lick and fuddled with the rum as he had the look of being, he won't think of the knife till he's gone so far he'll be afraid to come back after it to such a place by himself — chicken heart!"

“要他真的被击昏，被朗姆酒弄醉得像他表现出来的那样，那么除非他跑到很远，八成是想不起来这把刀的事了。而他一个人是不敢再回到这里来取刀的——这个胆小鬼。”

Two or three minutes later the murdered man, the blanketed corpse, the lidless coffin, and the open grave were under no inspection but the moon's.

两三分钟后，只有月光照着那个被杀害的人，用毯子裹着的尸体，那个没有盖上盖子的棺材，还有那座挖开的坟墓。

The stillness was complete again, too.

一切又恢复了平静。





Chapter 10


第十章

THE two boys flew on and on, toward the village, speechless with horror. They glanced backward over their shoulders from time to time, apprehensively, as if they feared they might be followed. Every stump that started up in their path seemed a man and an enemy, and made them catch their breath; and as they sped by some outlying cottages that lay near the village, the barking of the aroused watchdogs seemed to give wings to their feet.

两个孩子朝着村庄飞快地跑啊跑。因为十分害怕，他们一句话都不说。他们时不时地回头看，十分担心，似乎是害怕被人跟踪了。路上遇到的每个树桩，对他俩来说都像是一个人，一个敌人，让他们连气都不敢喘。在经过村庄附近的农舍时，受惊的狗的狂叫更吓得他俩跑得像腿上生了翅膀一样。

"If we can only get to the old tannery before we break down!" whispered Tom, in short catches between breaths. "I can't stand it much longer."

“要是在我们还没有累垮之前，能跑到老制革厂那儿就好了！”汤姆上气不接下气地低语道，“我实在跑不了多久了。”

Huckleberry's hard pantings were his only reply, and the boys fixed their eyes on the goal of their hopes and bent to their work to win it. They gained steadily on it, and at last, breast to breast, they burst through the open door and fell grateful and exhausted in the sheltering shadows beyond. By and by their pulses slowed down, and Tom whispered:

哈克贝利粗重的喘气声就是他的回答，两个孩子眼睛直盯着象征希望的目的地，一心一意拼命往那儿跑去。渐渐地他俩跑近了。最后，肩并肩地，他们冲进敞开的大门，满足又精疲力竭地扑倒在里边的阴暗处。渐渐的，他们的脉搏平静了下来，汤姆低声说：

"Huckleberry, what do you reckon'll come of this?"

“哈克贝利，你觉得这事结果会怎么样？”

"If Dr. Robinson dies, I reckon hanging'll come of it."

“要是鲁宾逊医生死了，我想就要用绞刑。”

"Do you though?"

"Why, I know it, Tom."

“那还用说，我知道的，汤姆。”

Tom thought a while, then he said:

汤姆想了一会，然后说：

"Who'll tell? We?"

“那谁去揭发呢？是我们吗？”

"What are you talking about? S'pose something happened and Injun Joe didn't hang? Why, he'd kill us some time or other, just as dead sure as we're a-laying here."

“你这是什么话，万一出了什么岔子，印第安·乔没上绞架，那该怎么办？他迟早会要我们的命，这一点肯定无疑。”

"That's just what I was thinking to myself, Huck."

“这正是我心里在想的事，哈克。”

"If anybody tells, let Muff Potter do it, if he's fool enough. He's generally drunk enough."

“要揭发就让莫夫·波特去干吧，如果他够蠢的话。他总是喝得醉醺醺的。”

Tom said nothing — went on thinking. Presently he whispered:

汤姆没吱声，还在想着。片刻后他低声说：

"Huck, Muff Potter don't know it. How can he tell?"

“哈克，莫夫·波特并不知道事情的真相，他怎么能去告发呢？”

"What's the reason he don't know it?"

“他为什么不知道出事了？”

"Because he'd just got that whack when Injun Joe done it. D'you reckon he could see anything? D'you reckon he knowed anything?"

“他恰好挨了一击，就在印第安·乔动手的时候，你觉得他能看得见么？你觉得他能知道什么吗？”

"By hokey, that's so, Tom!"

“真有你的，不错，是这样，汤姆。”

"And besides, look-a-here — maybe that whack done for him!"

“另外，你再想一想，那一击说不定要了他的命！”

"No, 'taint likely, Tom. He had liquor in him; I could see that; and besides, he always has. Well, when pap's full, you might take and belt him over the head with a church and you couldn't phase him. He says so, his own self. So it's the same with Muff Potter, of course. But if a man was dead sober, I reckon maybe that whack might fetch him; I dono."

“不，这不可能，汤姆。他当时喝酒了，我能看得出，更何况他经常喝。其实，当我爸喝足了，你就是在他头上绑上个教堂也不可能惊醒他。他自己也是这么说的。所以莫夫·波特当然也不例外喽。但是要是他绝对没喝酒，我猜那一击说不定会要了他的命，说不清。”

After another reflective silence, Tom said:

在静静地思考一会儿后，汤姆说：

"Hucky, you sure you can keep mum?"

“哈奇，你确定你能保密吗？”

"Tom, we got to keep mum. You know that. That Injun devil wouldn't make any more of drownding us than a couple of cats, if we was to squeak 'bout this and they didn't hang him. Now, look-a-here, Tom, less take and swear to one another — that's what we got to do — swear to keep mum."

“汤姆，我们必须保持沉默，这你也明白。一旦我们走漏了风声但他却没被绞死的话，那个鬼印第安·乔准会像淹两只小猫一样把我俩给淹死。好了，听着，汤姆，现在我们对彼此发誓——我们必须这样做——绝对要保持沉默。”

"I'm agreed. It's the best thing. Would you just hold hands and swear that we —"

“我同意。这再好不过了。请举起手发誓：我们……”

"Oh, no, that wouldn't do for this. That's good enough for little rubbishy common things — specially with gals, cuz they go back on you anyway, and blab if they get in a huff — but there orter be writing 'bout a big thing like this. And blood."

“哦，不不不，光举手发誓不行。这只能用于不值一提的小事情上——特别是女孩们干的事，因为她们不论如何都会忘了誓言的，一气之下就会泄密——像我们今天这样的大事情，还得要写下来。还得发血誓。”

Tom's whole being applauded this idea. It was deep, and dark, and awful; the hour, the circumstances, the surroundings, were in keeping with it. He picked up a clean pine shingle that lay in the moonlight, took a little fragment of "red keel" out of his pocket, got the moon on his work, and painfully scrawled these lines, emphasizing each slow down-stroke by clamping his tongue between his teeth, and letting up the pressure on the upstrokes.

汤姆完全同意这个想法。现在夜色深沉，四周漆黑，而且很恐怖。此时、此地、此景十分符合发誓需要的气氛。他从地上捡起一块躺在月光里的干净松木板，又从口袋里掏出一小截“红砚石”，然后对着月光，费劲地写着一些话。写下落笔时都又慢又重，边写边用牙齿夹着舌头使劲，上抬笔时又没有用那么大的力。最后费了九牛二虎之力，他才划成了下面几句：

"Huck Finn and Tom Sauyer swear they will keep mum about this and they wish they may drop down dead in their tracks if they ever tell and rot."

哈克·费恩和汤姆·索亚对天盟誓：我们将恪守秘密，若有半点私心假意泄密，愿当场倒毙，尸骨无存。

Huckleberry was filled with admiration of Tom's facility in writing, and the sublimity of his language. He at once took a pin from his lapel and was going to prick his flesh, but Tom said:

哈克贝利内心充满了对汤姆书写流利、内容庄重的崇拜。他立即从衣服领子上拿下一枚别针，准备戳破自己的肉放血，但汤姆说：

"Hold on! Don't do that. A pin's brass. It might have verdigrease on it."

“别动！别这么做。别针是铜做的，上面可能有铜绿。”

"What's verdigrease?"

“那是什么东西？”

"It's p'ison. That's what it is. You just swaller some of it once — you'll see."

“毒物说的就是它。你现在吞点下肚，就知道了。”

So Tom unwound the thread from one of his needles, and each boy pricked the ball of his thumb and squeezed out a drop of blood. In time, after many squeezes, Tom managed to sign his initials, using the ball of his little finger for a pen. Then he showed Huckleberry how to make an H and an F, and the oath was complete. They buried the shingle close to the wall, with some dismal ceremonies and incantations, and the fetters that bound their tongues were considered to be locked and the key thrown away.

于是汤姆去掉了他的一根针上的线。他们各自往大拇指上戳了一下，然后挤出两滴血来。接着他们又挤了数次，汤姆才能用蘸血的小指作笔，写下了自己姓名的首字母。他又教哈克写好Ｈ和F，这样宣誓就完成了。他们一边靠墙将松木板埋了，一边进行着干巴巴的埋葬仪式，念着咒语。他们认为连同埋葬的还有那锁住他们口舌的枷锁，而且开锁的钥匙被扔掉了。

A figure crept stealthily through a break in the other end of the ruined building, now, but they did not notice it.

有个人影鬼鬼祟祟地从这幢破楼的另一头缺口处溜进来，可是这时的他俩却没有发觉。

"Tom," whispered Huckleberry, "does this keep us from ever telling — always?"

“汤姆，”哈克贝利小声问道，“这样我们将永远不会泄密，永远，是吗？”

"Of course it does. It don't make any difference what happens, we got to keep mum. We'd drop down dead — don't you know that?"

“那当然了。不管发生了什么都不例外，我们得保守秘密，否则我们将倒地而死，这你知道吧？”

"Yes, I reckon that's so."

“对，我想这没错。”

They continued to whisper for some little time. Presently a dog set up a long, lugubrious howl just outside — within ten feet of them. The boys clasped each other suddenly, in an agony of fright.

他们又小声嘀咕了一阵子。没多久，就在外面，一只狗发出了一声那又长又凄凉的嚎叫，离他们不到十英尺远。两个孩子突然紧紧地抱在一起，异常害怕。

"Which of us does he mean?" gasped Huckleberry.

“它在哭嗥我们俩人中哪一个？”哈克贝利喘着气问道。

"I dono — peep through the crack. Quick!"

“我不知道，你从缝里往外瞅瞅。快点！”

"No, you, Tom!"

“不，你去看，汤姆！”

"I can't — I can't do it, Huck!"

“我不能——我不能去看，哈克！”

"Please, Tom. There 'tis again!"

“求你了，汤姆。它又叫起来了！”

"Oh, lordy, I'm thankful!" whispered Tom. "I know his voice. It's Bull Harbison."

“哦，我的老天爷，谢天谢地！”汤姆小声说，“我听得出他的声音，原来是布尔·哈宾逊。”

"Oh, that's good — I tell you, Tom, I was most scared to death; I'd a bet anything it was a stray dog."

“哦，太好了——告诉你啊，汤姆，我差点被吓死了，我打赌那是只野狗。”

The dog howled again. The boys' hearts sank once more.

那只狗又嗥起来，孩子们的心再次一沉。

"Oh, my! that ain't no Bull Harbison!" whispered Huckleberry. "Do, Tom!"

“哦，我的天那！那家伙绝不是布尔·哈宾逊！”哈克贝利悄声说，“去瞅瞅，汤姆！”

Tom, quaking with fear, yielded, and put his eye to the crack. His whisper was hardly audible when he said:

汤姆，虽然是吓得直发抖，让了步，把眼睛贴在裂逢那。汤姆话低得几乎让人听不见，他说：

"Oh, Huck, IT'S A STRAY DOG!"

“哦，哈克，那是只野狗！”

"Quick, Tom, quick! Who does he mean?"

“快点，汤姆，快点，那狗在叫什么呢？”

"Huck, he must mean us both — we're right together."

“哈克，它一定是嗥我们吧，我俩紧紧抱在一起呢。”

"Oh, Tom, I reckon we're goners. I reckon there ain't no mistake 'bout where I'll go to. I been so wicked."

“唉，汤姆，我想我俩死定了。我想我的下场如何已经没有疑问的了，我一直都那么坏。”

"Dad fetch it! This comes of playing hookey and doing everything a feller's told not to do. I might a been good, like Sid, if I'd a tried — but no, I wouldn't, of course. But if ever I get off this time, I lay I'll just waller in Sunday-schools!" And Tom began to snuffle a little.

“真是一团糟！这都怪我逃学旷课，又做了每一件不让做的事。我也会是个表现好的孩子，像希德那样，要是我努力的话，可是，不，我当然不会那么做。不过，这次要是我脱身的话，我敢打赌我一定在主日学校里好好干！”说着说着，汤姆开始有点抽鼻子了。

"You bad!" and Huckleberry began to snuffle too. "Consound it, Tom Sawyer, you're just old pie, 'longside o' what I am. Oh, lordy, lordy, lordy, I wisht I only had half your chance."

“你坏？”哈克贝利已跟着抽起鼻子来。“汤姆·索亚，你只是个老油条，远远比不上我的坏。哦，老天呀，老天呀，老天啊，我要是有你一半的运气就好了。”

Tom choked off and whispered:

汤姆哽咽着低声说：

"Look, Hucky, look! He's got his back to us!"

“瞧，哈奇，你瞧，它现在是背对我们的。”

Hucky looked, with joy in his heart.

哈克看了看后，心里很高兴：

"Well, he has, by jingoes! Did he before?"

“不错，是背对着我们，刚才也是这样的吗？”

"Yes, he did. But I, like a fool, never thought. Oh, this is bully, you know. Now who can he mean?"

“是的，可我傻乎乎的，根本没往上想。哦，这太棒了，你瞧。那么这回它是嗥谁的呢？”

The howling stopped. Tom pricked up his ears.

狗叫停止了，汤姆竖起耳朵听着。

"Sh! What's that?"he whispered.

“嘘！那是什么声音？”他小声说，

"Sounds like — like hogs grunting. No — it's somebody snoring, Tom."

“像——像是猪在打呼。不，汤姆，是人的打呼声。”

"That is it! Where 'bouts is it, Huck?"

“对，是打呼声！哈克，你听在什么地方？”

"I bleeve it's down at 'tother end. Sounds so, anyway. Pap used to sleep there, sometimes, 'long with the hogs, but laws bless you, he just lifts things when he snores. Besides, I reckon he ain't ever coming back to this town any more."

“我断定在那头。不过，至少听起来是这样的。我老爸过去睡在那头，有时候就和猪一起，但是上帝保佑啊，他要是打鼾的话，都能把东西震到天上去。再说，我估计他不会再回到这个镇上了。”

The spirit of adventure rose in the boys' souls once more.

冒险精神又一次充满了两个男孩的心。

"Hucky, do you das't to go if I lead?"

“哈奇，要是我打头阵，你敢跟我一块去看看吗？”

"I don't like to, much. Tom, s'pose it's Injun Joe!"

“我不想去，不太想。汤姆，万一那是印第安·乔呢！”

Tom quailed. But presently the temptation rose up strong again and the boys agreed to try, with the understanding that they would take to their heels if the snoring stopped. So they went tiptoeing stealthily down, the one behind the other. When they had got to within five steps of the snorer, Tom stepped on a stick, and it broke with a sharp snap. The man moaned, writhed a little, and his face came into the moonlight. It was Muff Potter. The boys' hearts had stood still, and their hopes too, when the man moved, but their fears passed away now. They tiptoed out, through the broken weather-boarding, and stopped at a little distance to exchange a parting word. That long, lugubrious howl rose on the night air again! They turned and saw the strange dog standing within a few feet of where Potter was lying, and facing Potter, with his nose pointing heavenward.

汤姆动摇了，但是那诱惑又变得强烈起来。两人决定试试看，他们达成默契：如果鼾声停了，他俩就溜之大吉。于是，他俩踮着脚尖，一个跟着一个偷偷走过去。当他们到达离打鼾那人不到五步远的地方，汤姆踩在一根树枝上，啪的一声树枝断了。那人哼哼着，稍微扭动了一下身子，脸暴露在月光下，原来是莫夫·波特。当莫夫·波特动弹时，两个孩子的心跳一下子停止了，希望也破灭了，但现在恐惧过去了。他俩踮着脚出去，穿过破烂的挡风木板墙外边，在不远的地方停下，相互道了别。那又长又凄凉的狗叫声又一次在夜空中响了起来。他们转身看见那条陌生的狗在离躺着的莫夫·波特不到几英尺的地方，面对着他，鼻子指向天空。

"Oh, geeminy, it's him!" exclaimed both boys, in a breath.

“哦，我的妈呀，那狗嗥的原来是他呀！”两个孩子都不约而同地惊呼道。

"Say, Tom — they say a stray dog come howling around Johnny Miller's house, 'bout midnight, as much as two weeks ago; and a whippoorwill come in and lit on the banisters and sung, the very same evening; and there ain't anybody dead there yet."

“喂，汤姆，听他们讲，有只野狗围着约翰尼·米勒家叫，大约在半夜的时候，就两星期前，就在那天晚上，还飞来一只夜鹰落在栏杆上叫个不停，不过那里并没有谁死啊。”

"Well, I know that. And suppose there ain't. Didn't Gracie Miller fall in the kitchen fire and burn herself terrible the very next Saturday?"

“嗯，这我知道，就算没有人死，但是格霍丝·米勒不正是在紧接着的星期六那天摔倒在厨房的火里，被烧得很惨吗？”

"Yes, but she ain't dead. And what's more, she's getting better, too."

“这没错，可她没有死啊，并且她正在康复呐。”

"All right, you wait and see. She's a goner, just as dead sure as Muff Potter's a goner. That's what the niggers say, and they know all about these kind of things, Huck."

“那好吧，你等着瞧吧！她就要完了，和莫夫·波特一样。这是那些黑鬼说的。他们对这类事情可灵着呢，哈克。”

Then they separated, cogitating. When Tom crept in at his bedroom window the night was almost spent. He undressed with excessive caution, and fell asleep congratulating himself that nobody knew of his escapade. He was not aware that the gently-snoring Sid was awake, and had been so for an hour.

接着他们分手了，可还在想这个问题。等汤姆从窗户爬进卧室时，那个夜晚几乎要过完了。他异常谨慎地脱去衣服，睡下的时候，庆幸没人发现自己的恶作剧。但他却没发现轻轻打着呼声的希德没睡着，而且醒了已有一个小时。

When Tom awoke, Sid was dressed and gone. There was a late look in the light, a late sense in the atmosphere. He was startled. Why had he not been called — persecuted till he was up, as usual? The thought filled him with bodings. Within five minutes he was dressed and downstairs, feeling sore and drowsy. The family were still at table, but they had finished breakfast. There was no voice of rebuke; but there were averted eyes; there was a silence and an air of solemnity that struck a chill to the culprit's heart. He sat down and tried to seem gay, but it was uphill work; it roused no smile, no response, and he lapsed into silence and let his heart sink down to the depths.

当汤姆醒时，希德已穿戴完毕走了。天色看起来已经大亮了，而起周围的气氛也暗示他有些晚了。汤姆感到很吃惊——为什么今天没人叫他——烦扰着他直到他起来，就像以前那样呢？这个想法让他充满不祥的预感。不到五分钟，他就穿好衣服到了楼下，感到浑身酸痛，昏昏欲睡。全家人还坐在餐桌旁，可是已经吃完了早饭。没人责备他，但大家却躲着他的目光，沉默和肃穆的气氛让他像个罪犯一样，他心凉了半截。他坐下来，装着愉快的样子，可这是个困难工作。大伙既不笑，也不回应。于是他也慢慢陷入沉默，心情沉重到了极点。

After breakfast his aunt took him aside, and Tom almost brightened in the hope that he was going to be flogged; but it was not so. His aunt wept over him and asked him how he could go and break her old heart so; and finally told him to go on, and ruin himself and bring her gray hairs with sorrow to the grave, for it was no use for her to try any more. This was worse than a thousand whippings, and Tom's heart was sorer now than his body. He cried, he pleaded for forgiveness, promised to reform over and over again, and then received his dismissal, feeling that he had won but an imperfect forgiveness and established but a feeble confidence.

早饭过后，汤姆被姨妈叫到一边，他马上开心起来，充满希望，以为就挨挨鞭子，但事实却不是这样。姨妈站在他旁边痛哭起来，并且责怪汤姆怎么能这样让她这把年纪的人伤心呢？最后她生气地叫汤姆就继续这样混下去，把自己毁掉，让她气得白着头悲伤地进坟墓，因为毕竟现在她不论怎样努力都没有用了。这一席话比一千下鞭打更糟，汤姆的心比肉体更加痛楚不安。他大哭起来，央求姨妈原谅他，一边一遍又一遍地保证会悔过自新，最后沮丧地觉得他只得到了一点宽恕，赢得了微弱的信任。

He left the presence too miserable to even feel revengeful toward Sid; and so the latter's prompt retreat through the back gate was unnecessary. He moped to school gloomy and sad, and took his flogging, along with Joe Harper, for playing hooky the day before, with the air of one whose heart was busy with heavier woes and wholly dead to trifles. Then he betook himself to his seat, rested his elbows on his desk and his jaws in his hands, and stared at the wall with the stony stare of suffering that has reached the limit and can no further go. His elbow was pressing against some hard substance. After a long time he slowly and sadly changed his position, and took up this object with a sigh. It was in a paper. He unrolled it. A long, lingering, colossal sigh followed, and his heart broke. It was his brass andiron knob!

他离去时很伤心，结果都想不起来要报复希德这件事，所以希德快速地从后门溜掉也是不必要的了。汤姆磨蹭着来到学校，十分郁闷、悲伤。他和乔·哈帕一起，因为头一天逃学的事情被鞭笞了一顿。他一副忧心忡忡的样子，根本不把鞭笞这类小事情放在眼里。之后，他重新回到位子上坐下来，两手托腮放在桌子上，盯着墙，一脸僵硬的、痛苦到极限并且无法驱除的表情。他的肘部压在什么硬东西上。过了好长一段时间，他才慢慢地伤心地换了个姿势，叹息着拿起那样东西。东西包在纸里，他打开纸包，接着重重地长叹一声，他的心碎了。原来纸包里包着他的那个铜把手！

This final feather broke the camel's back.

这一下犹如雪上加霜，让汤姆彻底地崩溃了。





Chapter 11


第十一章

CLOSE upon the hour of noon the whole village was suddenly electrified with the ghastly news. No need of the as yet undreamed-of telegraph; the tale flew from man to man, from group to group, from house to house, with little less than telegraphic speed. Of course the schoolmaster gave holiday for that afternoon; the town would have thought strangely of him if he had not.

临近中午时分，那个可怕的消息使全村人一下子惊呆了。不需要那连做梦都不会想到的电报，一个消息从一个人传到另一个人，一群人传到另一群人，从一户传到另一户，速度只比电报稍慢一点。因此校长决定当天下午放半天假，否则镇上人肯定会觉得他有毛病的。

A gory knife had been found close to the murdered man, and it had been recognized by somebody as belonging to Muff Potter — so the story ran. And it was said that a belated citizen had come upon Potter washing himself in the "branch" about one or two o'clock in the morning, and that Potter had at once sneaked off — suspicious circumstances, especially the washing, which was not a habit with Potter. It was also said that the town had been ransacked for this "murderer" (the public are not slow in the matter of sifting evidence and arriving at a verdict), but that he could not be found. Horsemen had departed down all the roads in every direction, and the Sheriff "was confident" that he would be captured before night.

一把带血的刀在被害人的附近被发现了，经人辨认说它是莫夫·波特的——传闻这样说。另外，据说一个晚上赶路的人碰巧看到波特在小河里冲洗自己，那时大概是凌晨一两点钟。见有人来，他马上溜掉了——十分可疑，尤其是冲洗这件事根本不是波特的习惯。还据说，镇上的人已经开始搜寻这个“杀人犯”了（公众从不怠慢细查证据并以此定罪这样的事），可是却没有找到。骑马的人分别沿着四面八方的路去追捕他，镇上的司法官“深信”：他在天黑之前就会被逮住。

All the town was drifting toward the graveyard. Tom's heartbreak vanished and he joined the procession, not because he would not a thousand times rather go anywhere else, but because an awful, unaccountable fascination drew him on. Arrived at the dreadful place, he wormed his small body through the crowd and saw the dismal spectacle. It seemed to him an age since he was there before. Somebody pinched his arm. He turned, and his eyes met Huckleberry's. Then both looked elsewhere at once, and wondered if anybody had noticed anything in their mutual glance. But everybody was talking, and intent upon the grisly spectacle before them.

全镇的人潮水般涌向坟地，汤姆伤心之情消失了，加入了那行列。实际上，他很想到别的地方去，但一种可怕的、不可言状的魔力一直吸引着他。到了这个可怕的地方后，他矮小的身体挤着穿过人群，看见了悲凉的场面。似乎对于他来说，距上次他来到那儿已经过了一年了。有人在他胳膊上拧了一下，他转过身来，眼神撞上了哈克贝利。然后俩人立即转看别的地方，生怕旁人从他俩的对视中看出什么破绽来。但是每个人都在谈话，一心关注的是面前的惨状。

"Poor fellow!" "Poor young fellow!" "This ought to be a lesson to grave robbers!" "Muff Potter'll hang for this if they catch him!" This was the drift of remark; and the minister said, "It was a judgment; His hand is here."

“可怜的人呀！”“不幸的年轻人呀！”“这对盗墓者来说该是个教训！”“莫夫·波特如果被逮到一定会被绞死的！”这样的话语不时传出。牧师却说：“这是他应得的惩罚，他的手在这儿呢。”

Now Tom shivered from head to heel; for his eye fell upon the stolid face of Injun Joe. At this moment the crowd began to sway and struggle, and voices shouted, "It's him! it's him! he's coming himself!"

汤姆从头到尾，吓得直打冷战，因为他的目光落到了印第安·乔不动声色的脸上。此时，人群开始骚动起来，有人大呼：“就是他！就是他！他自己竟来了！”

"Who? Who?" from twenty voices.

“是谁？是谁？”二十几个人问道。

"Muff Potter!"

“是莫夫·波特！”

"Hallo, he's stopped! — Look out, he's turning! Don't let him get away!"

“啊呀，他停下了！——注意，他在转身！别让他给跑了！”

People in the branches of the trees over Tom's head said he wasn't trying to get away — he only looked doubtful and perplexed.

在汤姆上方、爬在树上的人说他不是要跑，只是看起来有点迟疑和困惑。

"Infernal impudence!" said a bystander; "wanted to come and take a quiet look at his work, I reckon — didn't expect any company."

“该下地狱的狂徒！”一个旁观者说，“想偷偷来看看他干的好事，我说啊，没想到会来这么多人吧？!"

The crowd fell apart, now, and the Sheriff came through, ostentatiously leading Potter by the arm. The poor fellow's face was haggard, and his eyes showed the fear that was upon him. When he stood before the murdered man, he shook as with a palsy, and he put his face in his hands and burst into tears.

人群闪开，司法官穿行着，炫耀似地揪着波特的胳膊。这个可怜的家伙脸色憔悴，眼中流露出内心的恐惧。当他站到了被害人的面前，他颤抖得像中了风，手捂着脸，突然哭起来。

"I didn't do it, friends," he sobbed; "'pon my word and honor I never done it."

“这不是我干的，乡亲们，”他抽咽着说，“我以我的名誉发誓，我从没有杀人。”

"Who's accused you?" shouted a voice.

“谁控告你杀人了？”有人大声喊道。

This shot seemed to carry home. Potter lifted his face and looked around him with a pathetic hopelessness in his eyes. He saw Injun Joe, and exclaimed:

这一喊让波特有了转机。他抬起头，向周围环视了一下，眼中是一种可怜而无助的神情。他看到印第安·乔后大声呼道：

"Oh, Injun Joe, you promised me you'd never —"

“哦，印第安·乔，你保证过决不……”

"Is that your knife?" and it was thrust before him by the Sheriff.

“是你的刀吗？”他话还没说完，一把刀就被司法官扔到他面前。

Potter would have fallen if they had not caught him and eased him to the ground. Then he said:

波特差点一头栽下去，要不是人们扶着他，慢慢把他放到地上的话。然后他说着：

"Something told me 't if I didn't come back and get —" He shuddered; then waved his nerveless hand with a vanquished gesture and said, "Tell 'em, Joe, tell 'em — it ain't any use any more."

“有种预感告诉我如果我不回来拿——”他颤抖着，然后挥挥他无力的手，用一种被打败的手势说：“告诉大伙，乔。告诉他们吧——反正瞒也没有用了。”

Then Huckleberry and Tom stood dumb and staring, and heard the stonyhearted liar reel off his serene statement, they expecting every moment that the clear sky would deliver God's lightnings upon his head, and wondering to see how long the stroke was delayed. And when he had finished and still stood alive and whole, their wavering impulse to break their oath and save the poor betrayed prisoner's life faded and vanished away, for plainly this miscreant had sold himself to Satan and it would be fatal to meddle with the property of such a power as that.

于是哈克贝利和汤姆沉默地站在那里看着，听着那个铁石心肠的骗子滔滔不绝对大家编了一通谎言。他俩每一刻都在希望老天有眼，来些闪电劈死这个骗子，一直在想这报应还要多久才来。他们原本还犹豫着要不要打破誓言，去救那个遭陷害的犯人，可看到他讲完却依然安然无恙地站着，这股冲动消失了。因为很显然那个坏蛋已经卖身投靠了魔鬼撒旦，而和有强大力量的神的奴才斗是很危险的。

"Why didn't you leave? What did you want to come here for?" somebody said.

“你怎么不逃跑，还到这来干什么？”有人问道。

"I couldn't help it — I couldn't help it," Potter moaned. "I wanted to run away, but I couldn't seem to come anywhere but here." And he fell to sobbing again.

“我忍不住——我忍不住啊。”波特呻吟着说，“我想逃，可是我似乎除了来这儿，去不了任何地方去。”说完他又呜咽起来。

Injun Joe repeated his statement, just as calmly, a few minutes afterward on the inquest, under oath; and the boys, seeing that the lightnings were still withheld, were confirmed in their belief that Joe had sold himself to the devil. He was now become, to them, the most balefully interesting object they had ever looked upon, and they could not take their fascinated eyes from his face.

仅仅在验尸后的几分钟，印地安·乔平静地在发了誓的前提下重复了一遍他的证词。而两个孩子看见雷电并没有出现，更加相信乔已卖身给魔鬼。他成为了目前为止对这两个孩子来说最憎恨的有趣东西，他俩都不能把着迷的眼神从他脸上移开。

They inwardly resolved to watch him, nights, when opportunity should offer, in the hope of getting a glimpse of his dread master.

他们暗自决定要监视他，一旦晚上有机会的话，希望能够见识一下他那魔鬼主人。

Injun Joe helped to raise the body of the murdered man and put it in a wagon for removal; and it was whispered through the shuddering crowd that the wound bled a little! The boys thought that this happy circumstance would turn suspicion in the right direction; but they were disappointed, for more than one villager remarked:

印第安·乔也帮着把被害人的尸体抬上马车运走。惊魂未定的人群嘀咕说那死人的伤口竟还流了点血！两个孩子想这一可喜现象将有助于人们向接近真相的方向上怀疑。但他们马上又泄了气，因为不止一个村民说道：

"It was within three feet of Muff Potter when it done it."

“当时，莫夫·波特离死人不到三英尺远呢。”

Tom's fearful secret and gnawing conscience disturbed his sleep for as much as a week after this; and at breakfast one morning Sid said:

汤姆既不敢说出可怕的事实真相，良心又受到煎熬，因此搅得他事后一周内睡不好。一天，吃早饭时，希德说：

"Tom, you pitch around and talk in your sleep so much that you keep me awake half the time."

“汤姆，你翻来覆去，还说梦话，你搞得我只睡着了半夜。”

Tom blanched and dropped his eyes.

汤姆听后脸色煞白，垂下了眼皮。

"It's a bad sign," said Aunt Polly, gravely. "What you got on your mind, Tom?"

“这可不是好兆头，”波莉姨妈阴着脸说，“你有什么心事吗，汤姆？”

"Nothing. Nothing 't I know of." But the boy's hand shook so that he spilled his coffee.

“没有，我什么都不知道。”可他手在发抖，把咖啡给洒了出来。

"And you do talk such stuff," Sid said. "Last night you said, 'It's blood, it's blood, that's what it is!' You said that over and over. And you said, 'Don't torment me so — I'll tell!' Tell what? What is it you'll tell?"

“昨晚你的确说了这些东西，”希德说，“昨晚你说：‘是血，是血，就是血！’这就是你说的。你反复说个不停。你还说：‘不要再这样折磨我了——我干脆说出来！’说出来什么？你要把什么事情说出来？”

Everything was swimming before Tom. There is no telling what might have happened, now, but luckily the concern passed out of Aunt Polly's face and she came to Tom's relief without knowing it. She said:

汤姆只觉得眼前一阵晕眩，很难说会发生什么。幸运的是，波莉姨妈脸上的担忧之情转移了，这下她给汤姆解了围而自己却不知道。她说：

"Sho! It's that dreadful murder. I dream about it most every night myself. Sometimes I dream it's me that done it."

“嗨，没什么事，不就是那个恐怖的谋杀案吗。我自己还经常晚上梦见呢。有时还梦见是自己干的呢。”

Mary said she had been affected much the same way. Sid seemed satisfied. Tom got out of the presence as quick as he plausibly could, and after that he complained of toothache for a week, and tied up his jaws every night. He never knew that Sid lay nightly watching, and frequently slipped the bandage free and then leaned on his elbow listening a good while at a time, and afterward slipped the bandage back to its place again. Tom's distress of mind wore off gradually and the toothache grew irksome and was discarded. If Sid really managed to make anything out of Tom's disjointed mutterings, he kept it to himself.

玛丽说那谋杀案也让她受到类似的影响。这下希德才满足，不再问了。汤姆用他的能言善辩尽可能快地逃出了这个话题。接着他抱怨牙疼一个星期，每天晚上睡觉都把嘴扎起来。他不知道希德每天夜里都盯着他，时常解开他扎嘴的带子，然后撑着手肘听上好一阵子，再把带子扎在原来的地方上。汤姆心里的压力慢慢平复了，而牙疼这事也另他厌烦，于是他也再装了。即使希德从汤姆夜里的只言片语中理出了头绪，他也没有告诉别人。

It seemed to Tom that his schoolmates never would get done holding inquests on dead cats, and thus keeping his trouble present to his mind. Sid noticed that Tom never was coroner at one of these inquiries, though it had been his habit to take the lead in all new enterprises; he noticed, too, that Tom never acted as a witness — and that was strange; and Sid did not overlook the fact that Tom even showed a marked aversion to these inquests, and always avoided them when he could. Sid marveled, but said nothing. However, even inquests went out of vogue at last, and ceased to torture Tom's conscience.

在汤姆看来，他的同学们似乎永远不会停止玩给猫验尸的游戏，这也总让他记着自己的烦心事。希德发现汤姆在玩验尸游戏时，从来不扮验尸官，尽管他的习惯是在任何新鲜事情里都要打头阵，他还发现汤姆也不愿演证人——这太反常了。希德还清楚地记得在玩验尸游戏时，汤姆明显地表现出厌恶的样子，若有可能的话，总是尽量避免参加。希德感到奇怪，但什么都没说。然而，即使是验尸游戏最终也不再流行，进而停止了对汤姆良心的折磨。

Every day or two, during this time of sorrow, Tom watched his opportunity and went to the little grated jail window and smuggled such small comforts through to the "murderer" as he could get hold of. The jail was a trifling little brick den that stood in a marsh at the edge of the village, and no guards were afforded for it; indeed it was seldom occupied. These offerings greatly helped to ease Tom's conscience.

在汤姆难过的那段时间，每过一两天，他总是瞅准机会，去那个牢房的小栅栏窗那，把能弄到手的小慰问品从窗口递给那个“杀人犯”。牢房是个很小的砖砌小屋，位于村边的沼泽地上，没有看守被派在那，实际上，这里经常空着。这样的慰问使汤姆良心得到很大的宽慰。

The villagers had a strong desire to tar and feather Injun Joe and ride him on a rail, for body snatching, but so formidable was his character that nobody could be found who was willing to take the lead in the matter, so it was dropped. He had been careful to begin both of his inquest statements with the fight, without confessing the grave robbery that preceded it; therefore it was deemed wisest not to try the case in the courts at present.

全村的人强烈要求把那个盗墓贼印第安·乔给赶走，让他身上涂着柏油，插上羽毛骑在杆上被抬走。但由于这个家伙是个很难对付的角色，所以找不到一个人愿意领这个头，事情也就这样告吹了。印第安·乔十分小心，两次作证都是以打架那事开始的，没有承认打架之前的盗墓，所以人们觉得这桩公案目前最好不要开始审理。





Chapter 12


第十二章

ONE of the reasons why Tom's mind had drifted away from its secret troubles was, that it had found a new and weighty matter to interest itself about. Becky Thatcher had stopped coming to school. Tom had struggled with his pride a few days, and tried to "whistle her down the wind," but failed. He began to find himself hanging around her father's house, nights, and feeling very miserable. She was ill. What if she should die! There was distraction in the thought. He no longer took an interest in war, nor even in piracy. The charm of life was gone; there was nothing but dreariness left. He put his hoop away, and his bat; there was no joy in them any more. His aunt was concerned. She began to try all manner of remedies on him. She was one of those people who are infatuated with patent medicines and all newfangled methods of producing health or mending it. She was an inveterate experimenter in these things. When something fresh in this line came out she was in a fever, right away, to try it; not on herself, for she was never ailing, but on anybody else that came handy. She was a subscriber for all the "Health" periodicals and phrenological frauds; and the solemn ignorance they were inflated with was breath to her nostrils.

汤姆的注意力已经从那令人烦恼的秘密转移开了，原因之一是，他找到了另一件更重要、更有趣的事。贝基·撒切尔不来上学了。汤姆和自己的自尊心斗争了好几天，想了结这桩心事，可是没成功。他发现自己开始在夜里围着她家转悠，而且感到十分的伤心。她原来是生病了，可万一要是死了呢！想到这，他都快要发疯了。他不再对打仗啊甚至是当海盗感兴趣。生活的魅力消失了，留下的只是凄凉。他收起铁环以及球拍，在它们中再也没有乐趣存在了。他姨妈很担心。她开始用各种药来治疗他。他姨妈这个人和有些人一样，对于专卖药以及最新的强身健体的方式十分着迷。在这些东西上她是个根深蒂固的试验者。当这一类的新产品出来后，她就马上进入了狂热状态，开始试用，但并不是用在自己身上，因为她从来不生病，而是用在任何很容易就被她抓住的人身上。她订了所有的“健康”杂志和骨相学之类唬人的东西。其中假正经的无稽之谈对于她却是维生之本。

All the "rot" they contained about ventilation, and how to go to bed, and how to get up, and what to eat, and what to drink, and how much exercise to take, and what frame of mind to keep one's self in, and what sort of clothing to wear, was all gospel to her, and she never observed that her health journals of the current month customarily upset everything they had recommended the month before. She was as simple-hearted and honest as the day was long, and so she was an easy victim. She gathered together her quack periodicals and her quack medicines, and thus armed with death, went about on her pale horse, metaphorically speaking, with "hell following after." But she never suspected that she was not an angel of healing and the balm of Gilead in disguise, to the suffering neighbors.

里面所有的关于通风的“胡说” ，怎样睡觉，怎样起床，吃什么，喝什么，做多少运动，保持什么样的心态，穿什么样的衣服，对于她来说都是信条，她从来没有注意到她当月的健康杂志习惯性地推翻前一个月他们建议的一切。她这人头脑简单，十分实诚，所以极容易上当受骗。于是，她带上她那庸医写的刊物和庸医开的药，用比喻的说法，就是带上死亡，骑上灰白的马出发了，“身后跟着魔鬼”。但她从没有怀疑过自己是个有治愈能力的天使，是个未被发现的基列的香油，为救受苦受难的邻里而来。

The water treatment was new, now, and Tom's low condition was a windfall to her.

水疗法当时是个新玩意，而正处在低迷的状态的汤姆对于她来说是意外收获。

She had him out at daylight every morning, stood him up in the woodshed and drowned him with a deluge of cold water; then she scrubbed him down with a towel like a file, and so brought him to; then she rolled him up in a wet sheet and put him away under blankets till she sweated his soul clean and "the yellow stains of it came through his pores" — as Tom said.

她每天天一亮就把汤姆叫到外边，让他在木棚里站好，然后没头没脸地给他浇上一阵凉水。她还用毛巾像锉东西一样使劲给汤姆从上擦到下，让他缓过来。接着她用湿床单把他包起来，再盖上毯子直捂得他灵魂都被汗洗净了。“黄色的污泥秽水都从每根毛孔中流出”——汤姆如是说。

Yet notwithstanding all this, the boy grew more and more melancholy and pale and dejected. She added hot baths, sitz baths, shower baths, and plunges. The boy remained as dismal as a hearse. She began to assist the water with a slim oatmeal diet and blister plasters. She calculated his capacity as she would a jug's, and filled him up every day with quack cure-alls.

尽管经过这番折腾，那孩子却更加忧郁、更加苍白、沮丧。她又加上热水浴、坐浴、淋浴以及全身水浴法。那孩子仍然像灵车般的死气沉沉。她又往水里加了一点燕麦和治水泡的药膏。她计算着汤姆的用药量，像估量罐子容量一般，每天给他灌满庸医开的包治百病的药。

Tom had become indifferent to persecution by this time. This phase filled the old lady's heart with consternation. This indifference must be broken up at any cost. Now she heard of Painkiller for the first time. She ordered a lot at once. She tasted it and was filled with gratitude. It was simply fire in a liquid form. She dropped the water treatment and everything else, and pinned her faith to Painkiller. She gave Tom a teaspoonful and watched with the deepest anxiety for the result. Her troubles were instantly at rest, her soul at peace again; for the "indifference" was broken up. The boy could not have shown a wilder, heartier interest, if she had built a fire under him.

汤姆已经对这种等同“迫害”的治疗麻木不仁，这状态让老太太内心充满惊恐。她要不惜一切代价治好他的麻木不仁。她第一次听说了止痛药这个东西，就马上买了一堆，她尝试了一下，十分满意。用这种药简直就是液态的火。她放弃水疗法和别的一切疗法，把希望寄托在这止痛药上。她给汤姆服了一汤匙药，然后万分焦虑地等着结果。她的烦恼马上停止了，灵魂再次恢复了宁静。因为汤姆的麻木不仁被破除了。那孩子不可能再提得起更疯狂更衷心的兴致了，即使是老太太真的把他放在火上也不行。

Tom felt that it was time to wake up; this sort of life might be romantic enough, in his blighted condition, but it was getting to have too little sentiment and too much distracting variety about it. So he thought over various plans for relief, and finally hit upon that of professing to be fond of Painkiller. He asked for it so often that he became a nuisance, and his aunt ended by telling him to help himself and quit bothering her. If it had been Sid, she would have had no misgivings to alloy her delight; but since it was Tom, she watched the bottle clandestinely. She found that the medicine did really diminish, but it did not occur to her that the boy was mending the health of a crack in the sitting room floor with it.

汤姆觉得他该醒了，尽管这样处在阴郁状态下的生活让他觉得够浪漫，但是它变得越来越缺少温情，而扰乱心情的花样却越来越多。他想过很多解脱方案，终于想到一个假称喜欢吃止痛药的计划。于是他太频繁地找姨妈要药吃，结果弄得她烦起来，最后她干脆让汤姆自己动手爱拿多少就拿多少，不要再来烦她就行。要是换成希德，她完全放心享受快乐，可这是汤姆，所以，她暗中注意药瓶的情况。她发现药瓶的药的确越来越少，但想都没想到汤姆正在用这种药补客厅地板上的裂缝。

One day Tom was in the act of dosing the crack when his aunt's yellow cat came along, purring, eyeing the teaspoon avariciously, and begging for a taste. Tom said:

有一天，汤姆正在给裂缝“喂药”，他姨妈喂养的那只黄猫走过来，咪咪地叫着，眼睛贪婪地盯着汤匙，好像是求着要来一口。汤姆说：

"Don't ask for it unless you want it, Peter."

“你要不是真想要，就别要了，彼得。”

But Peter signified that he did want it.

可是彼得表示它确实想要。

"You better make sure."

“你最好拿定主意。”

Peter was sure.

彼得拿定了主意。

"Now you've asked for it, and I'll give it to you, because there ain't anything mean about me; but if you find you don't like it, you mustn't blame anybody but your own self."

“这可是你自找的，我就给你，因为我从不小气，但是你若要是吃了但不喜欢，你谁都不能怨只能怪你自己了。”

Peter was agreeable. So Tom pried his mouth open and poured down the Painkiller. Peter sprang a couple of yards in the air, and then delivered a war whoop and set off round and round the room, banging against furniture, upsetting flowerpots, and making general havoc. Next he rose on his hind feet and pranced around, in a frenzy of enjoyment, with his head over his shoulder and his voice proclaiming his unappeasable happiness. Then he went tearing around the house again spreading chaos and destruction in his path. Aunt Polly entered in time to see him throw a few double somersets, deliver a final mighty hurrah, and sail through the open window, carrying the rest of the flowerpots with him. The old lady stood petrified with astonishment, peering over her glasses; Tom lay on the floor expiring with laughter.

彼得同意了。因此汤姆撬开它的嘴，把止痛药灌下去。彼得在空中跳出去两三码远，嚎叫了一声，接着在屋里转来转去，砰的一声撞在家具上，碰翻了花瓶，弄得一片狼藉。接着它后腿支地站起来，在一阵疯狂的乐趣中跳来跳去，头高昂过肩，它的声音宣告着它按捺不住的快乐。随后，它又在屋里狂奔乱跑，所到之处，不是碰翻这个就是毁了那个。波莉姨妈进来时正好看见它在连翻了好几个斤斗。它最后哇地大叫一声，从敞开的窗户飞出去，把余下的花瓶也带了下去。老太太站在那儿惊得呆住了，眼睛从镜框上往外瞪着；而汤姆却躺在地板上笑得快死过去了。

"Tom, what on earth ails that cat?"

“汤姆，那猫到底得了什么病？”

"I don't know, aunt," gasped the boy.

“我不知道，姨妈。”他喘着气说。

"Why, I never see anything like it. What did make him act so?"

“我还没见过这样的事情，是什么让它变成那个样子？”

"Deed I don't know, Aunt Polly; cats always act so when they're having a good time."

“我真的不知道，波莉姨妈。猫快活的时候总是那个样子。”

"They do, do they?" There was something in the tone that made Tom apprehensive.

“它们是那样的吗？”那语气中有点令汤姆生畏的东西。

"Yes'm. That is, I believe they do."

“是的，姨妈。是那样，我相信它们会那样。”

"You do?"

“你是这样想的？”

"Yes'm."

“是，姨妈。”

The old lady was bending down, Tom watching, with interest emphasized by anxiety. Too late he divined her "drift." The handle of the telltale teaspoon was visible under the bed valance. Aunt Polly took it, held it up. Tom winced, and dropped his eyes. Aunt Polly raised him by the usual handle — his ear — and cracked his head soundly with her thimble.

老太太正在弯腰，汤姆关注着，带着被焦虑加强的兴致。当他看出老太太的用意时，为时已晚，因为泄露秘密的那把汤匙的把儿已暴露在床帷下了。波莉姨妈捡起汤匙，拿了起来。汤姆畏缩了，垂下了眼皮。波莉姨妈抓住她经常用的“把儿”——他的耳朵，还用顶针把敲他头敲得砰砰响。

"Now, sir, what did you want to treat that poor dumb beast so, for?"

“我的小祖宗，你干吗要这样对待那个不会说话的畜生？”

"I done it out of pity for him — because he hadn't any aunt."

“我是可怜它才给它吃药的——因为他又没有什么姨妈。”

"Hadn't any aunt! — you numbskull. What has that got to do with it?"

“什么没有姨妈！——你这傻瓜！那和这事有什么关系？”

"Heaps. Because if he'd a had one she'd a burnt him out herself! She'd a roasted his bowels out of him 'thout any more feeling than if he was a human!"

“关系多着呢。它要是有姨妈，她肯定会给它灌药烧坏它！”她会把它的肠子都烧出来，就算它是个人，情况也不会好到哪去。”

Aunt Polly felt a sudden pang of remorse. This was putting the thing in a new light; what was cruelty to a cat might be cruelty to a boy, too. She began to soften; she felt sorry. Her eyes watered a little, and she put her hand on Tom's head and said gently:

波莉姨妈突然感到一阵强烈的悔意。这让一切以另一种方式呈现了；猫受不了，那孩子不也同样受不了吗？她软下来，心里感到内疚。她眼睛有点湿润，把手放在汤姆头上，温柔地说：

"I was meaning for the best, Tom. And Tom, it did do you good."

“我本是好意啊，汤姆。再说，汤姆，那确实对你有好处。”

Tom looked up in her face with just a perceptible twinkle peeping through his gravity.

汤姆抬起头看着姨妈的脸，严肃中明显地眨了下眼睛：

"I know you was meaning for the best, Auntie, and so was I with Peter. It done him good, too. I never see him get around so since —"

“我知道你是好意，姨妈。我对彼得也是好意呀。那药对它也有好处。我再也没有看见它的影子，自从——”

"Oh, go 'long with you, Tom, before you aggravate me again. And you try and see if you can't be a good boy, for once, and you needn't take any more medicine."

“哦，去你的，汤姆。别再气我了。你试试，看看你能不能做个听话的孩子，就一次，这样的话，你就不需要再用药了。”

Tom reached school ahead of time. It was noticed that this strange thing had been occurring every day latterly. And now, as usual of late, he hung about the gate of the schoolyard instead of playing with his comrades. He was sick, he said, and he looked it. He tried to seem to be looking everywhere but whither he really was looking — down the road. Presently Jeff Thatcher hove in sight, and Tom's face lighted; he gazed a moment, and then turned sorrowfully away. When Jeff arrived, Tom accosted him, and "led up" warily to opportunities to remark about Becky, but the giddy lad never could see the bait. Tom watched and watched, hoping whenever a frisking frock came in sight, and hating the owner of it as soon as he saw she was not the right one. At last frocks ceased to appear, and he dropped hopelessly into the dumps; he entered the empty schoolhouse and sat down to suffer. Then one more frock passed in at the gate, and Tom's heart gave a great bound. The next instant he was out, and "going on" like an Indian; yelling, laughing, chasing boys, jumping over the fence at risk of life and limb, throwing handsprings, standing on his head — doing all the heroic things he could conceive of, and keeping a furtive eye out, all the while, to see if Becky Thatcher was noticing. But she seemed to be unconscious of it all; she never looked. Could it be possible that she was not aware that he was there? He carried his exploits to her immediate vicinity; came war-whooping around, snatched a boy's cap, hurled it to the roof of the schoolhouse, broke through a group of boys, tumbling them in every direction, and fell sprawling, himself, under Becky's nose, almost upsetting her — and she turned, with her nose in the air, and he heard her say: "Mf! some people think they're mighty smart — always showing off!"

汤姆提早来到了学校。人们发现，这怪事最近每天都发生。而现在，和往常一样，他独自一人在校门口徘徊，而没跟伙伴们在一起玩耍。他说自己病了，看上去也确实像生病的样子。他装作是在四处张望。但他真正关注的是那边的那条路。这时，杰夫·撒切尔跃入眼帘，汤姆喜上眉梢，他盯着看了一会，然后失望地转过身去。等杰夫走近，汤姆便同他搭讪，谨慎地“创造”机会来谈论贝基，可那轻率的小伙子却从来不上钩。汤姆看啊看啊，每当一个穿连衣裙的跳跃身影映入眼帘时都满怀希望，而一旦他发现那不是他要等的人，他马上又对那连衣裙的主人恨得咬牙切齿。最后，穿连衣裙的身影不再出现，他掉进了毫无希望的沮丧之中，他走进空无一人的教室，坐在那里难过。这时，又一个穿连衣裙的女孩从大门口飘进来，汤姆的心狠狠地跳了一下。下一秒，他已经在教室外了，开始“登场表演”，就像一个印第安人。他叫着，笑着，追赶着其他男孩，冒着摔死或摔瘸的危险跳过栅栏，翻筋斗或者拿大顶——做着一切他能想到的英雄般的事情，同时还偷眼看看贝基·撒切尔是不是在关注着。可是她好像一点也没发觉，甚至连看都不看。这有可能是因为她没有注意到他在那里吗？于是他就把他的拿手好戏搬到了她附近的地方，“冲啊！杀呀”地喊个不停，抓下一个男孩子的帽子就扔到教室的屋顶上，然后又冲向另一群孩子，弄得他们四下跌到开来，自己也四脚朝天地摔在贝基鼻子底下，还差点把她绊倒——她转过身去，昂着头，他听见她说：“哼！有的人自以为很聪明——老是卖弄！”

Tom's cheeks burned. He gathered himself up and sneaked off, crushed and crestfallen.

汤姆脸直发烧。他爬起来，偷偷地溜了，被斗败了，一副垂头丧气的样子。





Chapter 13


第十三章

TOM'S mind was made up now. He was gloomy and desperate. He was a forsaken, friendless boy, he said; nobody loved him; when they found out what they had driven him to, perhaps they would be sorry; he had tried to do right and get along, but they would not let him; since nothing would do them but to be rid of him, let it be so; and let them blame him for the consequences — why shouldn't they? What right had the friendless to complain? Yes, they had forced him to it at last: he would lead a life of crime. There was no choice.

现在汤姆下定了决心。他既悲伤又绝望。他说自己是个被抛弃的没有朋友的孩子，没有人喜欢他。等他们发现他们把他逼成什么样子了的时候，也许他们就会后悔了。他竭尽全力做正确的事情以便和大家好好相处，但是他们就是不让他那样做；既然没什么事儿能让他们不排挤他，那就随他们的便吧；就让他们把这样做的后果归咎于他好了——他们就这德性，随他们去！没有朋友的人有什么资格抱怨？是的，是他们逼他走到那一步的：他将过上犯罪的生活。没有别的选择了。

By this time he was far down Meadow Lane, and the bell for school to "take up" tinkled faintly upon his ear. He sobbed, now, to think he should never, never hear that old familiar sound any more — it was very hard, but it was forced on him; since he was driven out into the cold world, he must submit — but he forgave them. Then the sobs came thick and fast.

这个时候他在草坪巷的尽头，学校的上课铃微弱地在耳边响起。现在他哭了，想到他再也不能听到那熟悉的声音了——很难，但是他是被逼的；既然他已经被驱逐到那个冷酷的世界，那他就必须承受——但是他会原谅他们。他哭得越来越厉害。

Just at this point he met his soul's sworn comrade, Joe Harper — hard-eyed, and with evidently a great and dismal purpose in his heart. Plainly here were "two souls with but a single thought." Tom, wiping his eyes with his sleeve, began to blubber out something about a resolution to escape from hard usage and lack of sympathy at home by roaming abroad into the great world never to return; and ended by hoping that Joe would not forget him.

就在这时他遇到了他的铁哥们乔·哈帕——他眼神儿发直，很明显他心中有一个伟大且阴暗的想法。很显然，他们俩是有着同样想法的两个灵魂。汤姆用袖子抹了抹眼睛，开始边哭边说他决定要逃离这只会使唤他而没有任何同情心的家，流浪到国外并且再也不回来了，最后他说希望乔不要忘记他。

But it transpired that this was a request which Joe had just been going to make of Tom, and had come to hunt him up for that purpose. His mother had whipped him for drinking some cream which he had never tasted and knew nothing about; it was plain that she was tired of him and wished him to go; if she felt that way, there was nothing for him to do but succumb; he hoped she would be happy, and never regret having driven her poor boy out into the unfeeling world to suffer and die.

但是这正巧是乔原本想提的要求和他来找汤姆的目的。他妈妈因为他偷吃了一些奶油而打了他一顿，可他从来都没有尝过，而且根本都不知道。显然她已经厌烦他了，并且希望他走开；如果她这样觉得，那他就只有服从了。他希望她幸福，永远不会后悔把她那可怜的儿子赶出家门，赶到那无情的世界受苦，死去。

As the two boys walked sorrowing along, they made a new compact to stand by each other and be brothers and never separate till death relieved them of their troubles. Then they began to lay their plans. Joe was for being a hermit, and living on crusts in a remote cave, and dying, sometime, of cold and want and grief; but after listening to Tom, he conceded that there were some conspicuous advantages about a life of crime, and so he consented to be a pirate.

两个孩子伤心地走着，他们立下了一个新的誓言——相互支持，永远做兄弟，除非到了死亡让他们彻底远离烦恼的那一天，他们将永不分离。然后他们开始制订计划。乔主张去当个隐士，找个遥远的山洞靠干面包维生，一直到某天冻死饿死或者伤心而死；但是听了汤姆的话，他觉得去犯罪比当隐士有更明显的优点，所以他也同意去当海盗了。

Three miles below St. Petersburg, at a point where the Mississippi River was a trifle over a mile wide, there was a long, narrow, wooded island, with a shallow bar at the head of it, and this offered well as a rendezvous. It was not inhabited; it lay far over toward the further shore, abreast a dense and almost wholly unpeopled forest. So Jackson's Island was chosen. Who were to be the subjects of their piracies, was a matter that did not occur to them. Then they hunted up Huckleberry Finn, and he joined them promptly, for all careers were one to him; he was indifferent. They presently separated to meet at a lonely spot on the riverbank two miles above the village at the favorite hour — which was midnight. There was a small log raft there which they meant to capture. Each would bring hooks and lines, and such provision as he could steal in the most dark and mysterious way — as became outlaws. And before the afternoon was done, they had all managed to enjoy the sweet glory of spreading the fact that pretty soon the town would "hear something." All who got this vague hint were cautioned to "be mum and wait."

在圣彼得堡下游三英里的地方，密西西比河还是一英里宽的细流，有一个又长又窄、森林覆盖的小岛，岛的一端有一个浅滩，那是个集合的好地方。岛上没有人；它离对岸很远，与一个茂密而人迹罕至的森林相邻。于是杰克逊岛就被选中了。谁会成为他们作为海盗来打劫的目标，他们也还没有想过。然后他们找到了哈克贝利·费恩，他立刻就加入了他们的队伍，对于他来说所有职业都差不多；他怎样都无所谓。他们不久就分开了并且约定在他们最喜欢的时候——半夜于村子上游两英里处的河岸上一个僻静处碰面。那有一只他们想夺取的木筏。每个人都带着钩子和绳子，以及各自尽可能用最阴暗且神秘的方式搞来的东西——成了强盗就该像那样。傍晚时分，他们就已经在镇子里扬出话来，说人们很快就将“听到重大新闻”，对此他们倍感甜蜜与光荣。所有得到这样模糊暗示的人都被警告要“别出声，等着瞧”。

About midnight Tom arrived with a boiled ham and a few trifles, and stopped in a dense undergrowth on a small bluff overlooking the meeting place. It was starlight, and very still. The mighty river lay like an ocean at rest. Tom listened a moment, but no sound disturbed the quiet. Then he gave a low, distinct whistle. It was answered from under the bluff. Tom whistled twice more; these signals were answered in the same way. Then a guarded voice said:

大约午夜的时候汤姆带着一个熟汉堡和一些小东西，他站在一个小悬崖上的一片又密又矮的树林里。从悬崖往下望就能瞧见他们约好的碰头处。天上星光闪闪，四周寂静。那大河像是一片在休息的大海静静躺在那里。汤姆听了一小会儿，但是没有任何声音打乱这片宁静。然后他吹了声低沉却清晰的口哨。悬崖下面有人回应。汤姆又吹了两次；这些信号都被用同样的方式回复了。然后一个警觉的声音说：

"Who goes there?"

“谁在那？”

"Tom Sawyer, the Black Avenger of the Spanish Main. Name your names."

“汤姆·索亚，西班牙大陆黑衣复仇者。说说你们是谁。”

"Huck Finn the Red-Handed, and Joe Harper the Terror of the Seas." Tom had furnished these titles, from his favorite literature.

“赤手大盗哈克·费恩，海上死神乔·哈帕。”这些头衔是汤姆从他最喜欢的文学作品里挑出来给他们的。

" 'Tis well. Give the countersign."

“好。口令？”

Two hoarse whispers delivered the same awful word simultaneously to the brooding night:

两个沙哑的声音在那寂静的夜里轻轻地说出同样一个恐怖的字：

"BLOOD!"

“血！”

Then Tom tumbled his ham over the bluff and let himself down after it, tearing both skin and clothes to some extent in the effort. There was an easy, comfortable path along the shore under the bluff, but it lacked the advantages of difficulty and danger so valued by a pirate.

然后汤姆就把他那只火腿从悬崖上扔了下去，他自己也随着滑了下去，滑下去的时候还划破了皮，衣服也刮破了。其实悬崖下面沿着河岸有一条走起来既容易又舒服的路，但是那缺少海盗们很珍惜的那种困难与危险。

The Terror of the Seas had brought a side of bacon, and had about worn himself out with getting it there. Finn the Red-Handed had stolen a skillet and a quantity of half-cured leaf tobacco, and had also brought a few corncobs to make pipes with. But none of the pirates smoked or "chewed" but himself. The Black Avenger of the Spanish Main said it would never do to start without some fire. That was a wise thought; matches were hardly known there in that day. They saw a fire smouldering upon a great raft a hundred yards above, and they went stealthily thither and helped themselves to a chunk. They made an imposing adventure of it, saying, "Hist!" every now and then, and suddenly halting with finger on lip; moving with hands on imaginary dagger hilts; and giving orders in dismal whispers that if "the foe" stirred, to "let him have it to the hilt," because "dead men tell no tales." They knew well enough that the raftsmen were all down at the village laying in stores or having a spree, but still that was no excuse for their conducting this thing in an unpiratical way.

海上死神带回来了一大块咸猪肉，为了把它带回来他累的筋疲力尽。赤手大盗费恩偷了一个长柄平底煎锅和一些烤得半干的烟叶，他还带回来几个玉米棒子来做烟斗。但是除了他自己以外没有别的海盗抽或者“嚼”了那些烟叶。西班牙大陆黑衣复仇者说没有火的话什么事儿也开始不了。那是个聪明的想法；当时侯那个地方几乎都没有人知道有火柴。他们看到了一百码以外的上游处，一个大木筏上有一堆冒着烟的火，他们悄悄地到那里去取了一些火。他们经历了一番难忘的冒险，时不时地还说：“嘘！”然后突然把手指放在嘴唇上停下来，他们手握着虚拟的刀柄前进，还阴阴地低声发布了命令说如果“敌人”动一下，那就让他们“葬在刀柄下”，因为“死人不会乱说话”。他们都很明白撑木筏的人都到镇上去买东西或者寻开心去了，但是那也不是他们不把这件事儿用海盗的方式做出来的借口。

They shoved off, presently, Tom in command, Huck at the after oar and Joe at the forward. Tom stood amidships, gloomy-browed, and with folded arms, and gave his orders in a low, stern whisper:

他们不久就撑船离开了，汤姆指挥，哈克滑后边的桨，乔滑前边的。汤姆站在船中间，忧郁的紧锁着眉头，双手抱胸，低沉而严厉地轻轻发号施令：

"Luff, and bring her to the wind!"

“转舵，向着风行驶！”

"Aye-aye, sir!"

“是，是，船长！”

"Steady, steady-y-y-y!"

“把定，直走！”

"Steady it is, sir!"

“直走了，船长！”

"Let her go off a point!"

“向外转一点！”

"Point it is, sir!"

“转了一点，船长！”

As the boys steadily and monotonously drove the raft toward midstream it was no doubt understood that these orders were given only for "style," and were not intended to mean anything in particular.

当孩子们平稳而始终如一地把木筏滑向河中间的时候，毫无疑问这些口令都只是为了摆个“样式”，而不是有什么特别的意思。

"What sail's she carrying?"

“现在升的是什么帆？”

"Courses, tops'ls, and flying jib, sir."

“大横帆、中桅帆、三角帆，船长。”

"Send the r'yals up! Lay out aloft, there, half a dozen of ye — foretopmaststuns'l! Lively, now!"

“把上桅帆拉起来！升到桅杆顶上，喂，你们六个一齐动手——拉起前中桅的副帆！使点劲，喂！”

"Aye-aye, sir!"

“是，船长！”

"Shake out that maintogalans'l! Sheets and braces! Now, my hearties!"

“拉起第二接桅帆！拉起脚索，转帆索！喂，伙计们！”

"Aye-aye, sir!"

“是——是，船长！”

"Hellum-a-lee — hard aport! Stand by to meet her when she comes! Port, port! Now, men! With a will! Stead-y-y-y!"

“要起大风了——左转舵！风一来就顺风开！左转，左转！伙计们，加把油！照直——走！”

"Steady it is, sir!"

“是，照直走，船长！”

The raft drew beyond the middle of the river; the boys pointed her head right, and then lay on their oars. The river was not high, so there was not more than a two- or three-mile current. Hardly a word was said during the next three-quarters of an hour. Now the raft was passing before the distant town. Two or three glimmering lights showed where it lay, peacefully sleeping, beyond the vague vast sweep of star-gemmed water, unconscious of the tremendous event that was happening. The Black Avenger stood still with folded arms, "looking his last" upon the scene of his former joys and his later sufferings, and wishing "she" could see him now, abroad on the wild sea, facing peril and death with dauntless heart, going to his doom with a grim smile on his lips. It was but a small strain on his imagination to remove Jackson's Island beyond eyeshot of the village, and so he "looked his last" with a broken and satisfied heart. The other pirates were looking their last, too; and they all looked so long that they came near letting the current drift them out of the range of the island. But they discovered the danger in time, and made shift to avert it. About two o'clock in the morning the raft grounded on the bar two hundred yards above the head of the island, and they waded back and forth until they had landed their freight. Part of the little raft's belongings consisted of an old sail, and this they spread over a nook in the bushes for a tent to shelter their provisions; but they themselves would sleep in the open air in good weather, as became outlaws.

木筏驶过了河中间，孩子们转正船头，然后努力划桨。那河的水流不算急，流速不超过两三英里。接下来的四十五分中里几乎没有人说话。现在木筏正驶过那遥远的城镇。两三点微弱的灯光显示着镇子的所在，它在那点缀着星光，广阔而蜿蜒的水域对岸安静地沉睡，对所发生的大事浑然不知。黑衣复仇者插着双臂，静静地站在那里，他在看“最后一眼”，看那之前既给了他欢乐又给了他痛苦的地方，并希望“她”此刻能够看见他，看见他在波涛汹涌的海上，勇敢地面对着危险，一脸冷笑地从容赴死。他稍稍用了一点想象力就把杰克逊岛挪到了一个镇子看不到的地方，所以他带着一颗破碎却满足的心看了那“最后一眼”。另两个海盗也在看他们的“最后一眼”。他们看得太久了以至于他们差点让水流把他们冲过那个岛去。但是他们及时发现了危险并且避免了它。大约在凌晨两点的时候，木筏在离岛的一端上游两百码的浅滩停下了，于是他们就在水里趟来趟去直到他们把带来的货物全都搬到岸上。小木筏上原来有一块旧帆，他们把它铺开在灌木丛中支成了一个帐篷来盖他们的粮食；但是如果天晴的话他们自己就会像罪犯那样睡在外面。

They built a fire against the side of a great log twenty or thirty steps within the sombre depths of the forest, and then cooked some bacon in the frying pan for supper, and used up half of the corn "pone" stock they had brought. It seemed glorious sport to be feasting in that wild free way in the virgin forest of an unexplored and uninhabited island, far from the haunts of men, and they said they never would return to civilization. The climbing fire lit up their faces and threw its ruddy glare upon the pillared tree trunks of their forest temple, and upon the varnished foliage and festooning vines.

在距离树林那阴暗的深处有二三十步远的地方，他们在一根圆木旁边生起了一堆火，然后在平底煎锅里做了些咸猪肉当晚饭，还把他们带来的玉米饼吃掉了一半。在一片未被探勘的无人居住的原始森林自由自在地野餐，远离人群，这样看起来很好，所以他们说永远不回文明世界了。升起的火焰照耀着他们的脸庞，也照耀着他们用柱子般的树干撑起的森林圣殿和那些像涂过漆一样的树叶和缀着花的葡萄藤。

When the last crisp slice of bacon was gone, and the last allowance of corn pone devoured, the boys stretched themselves out on the grass, filled with contentment. They could have found a cooler place, but they would not deny themselves such a romantic feature as the roasting campfire.

当他们吃完了最后一块脆咸猪肉，吞掉最后一份玉米饼以后，孩子们平躺在草地上，心满意足。他们本来可以找一个更凉快的地方，但是他们不会自己离开如此浪漫的篝火的。

"Ain't it gay?" said Joe.

“这不是很快乐么？”乔说。

"It's nuts!" said Tom. "What would the boys say if they could see us?"

“快乐得发狂！”汤姆说。“别的孩子要是看见咱们这样会怎么说呢？”

"Say? Well, they'd just die to be here — hey, Hucky!"

“怎么说？嗯，他们肯定会拼命想来这儿——嘿是不是，哈奇！”

"I reckon so," said Huckleberry; "anyways, I'm suited. I don't want nothing better'n this. I don't ever get enough to eat, gen'ally — and here they can't come and pick at a feller and bullyrag him so."

“我也这么想的，”哈克贝利说，“反正我喜欢这。我觉得没什么能比这更好了。我基本上从来都没吃饱过——而且在这儿他们也不能来欺负我了。”

"It's just the life for me," said Tom. "You don't have to get up, mornings, and you don't have to go to school, and wash, and all that blame foolishness. You see a pirate don't have to do anything, Joe, when he's ashore, but a hermit he has to be praying considerable, and then he don't have any fun, anyway, all by himself that way."

“这正是我想要的生活，”汤姆说。“你不必一大早就起床，你不必去上学，不必洗漱，那些傻事儿都不用干了。乔，你看当海盗在岸上的时候不用做任何事儿，但是隐士就老得做祷告，然后他就不会有什么好玩的事儿了，反正总是自己一个人。”

"Oh, yes, that's so," said Joe, "but I hadn't thought much about it, you know. I'd a good deal rather be a pirate, now that I've tried it."

“哦，是呀，是那样的，”乔说，“但是其实我没怎么想那回事。现在试过以后我觉得还是当海盗好。”

"You see," said Tom, "people don't go much on hermits, nowadays, like they used to in old times, but a pirate's always respected. And a hermit's got to sleep on the hardest place he can find, and put sackcloth and ashes on his head, and stand out in the rain, and —"

“你看见了吗，”汤姆说，“现在人们不如从前那么喜欢当隐士了，但是海盗却一直受人尊敬。而且隐士还得睡在他能找到的最硬的地方，头上还得缠着抹布，抹着灰，还要在雨里淋着，还要——”

"What does he put sackcloth and ashes on his head for?" inquired Huck.

“他为什么要在头上缠着麻布抹着灰？”哈克问。

"I dono. But they've got to do it. Hermits always do. You'd have to do that if you was a hermit."

“我不知道。但是他们必须这么做隐士总是这样的。如果你是隐士，你也得这么做。”

"Dern'd if I would," said Huck.

“我才不会呢，”，哈克说。

"Well, what would you do?"

“嗯，那你想干嘛？”

"I dono. But I wouldn't do that."

“我不知道。但是我肯定不干那个。”

"Why, Huck, you'd have to. How'd you get around it?"

“怎么呢，哈克，你必须这么做。逃是逃不掉的。”

"Why, I just wouldn't stand it. I'd run away."

“怎么呢，我就是受不了。我会逃开的。”

"Run away! Well, you would be a nice old slouch of a hermit. You'd be a disgrace."

“逃开！好吧，你会成为一个地道的又老又懒的隐士。你真丢人。”

The Red-Handed made no response, being better employed. He had finished gouging out a cob, and now he fitted a weed stem to it, loaded it with tobacco, and was pressing a coal to the charge and blowing a cloud of fragrant smoke — he was in the full bloom of luxurious contentment. The other pirates envied him this majestic vice, and secretly resolved to acquire it shortly. Presently Huck said:

赤手大盗正忙着干别的，没有回答。他刚刚挖空一根玉米棒子，现在正忙着把一根野草的茎放进去，装上点烟叶，把炭放进去点着，然后喷出一口香香的烟——他正享受着那极大的满足感。其他的那两个海盗很羡慕他那副高贵的痞子相，暗下决心要尽快学会这招。过了一会哈克说：

"What does pirates have to do?"

“海盗要干什么？”

Tom said: "Oh, they have just a bully time — take ships and burn them, and get the money and bury it in awful places in their island where there's ghosts and things to watch it, and kill everybody in the ships — make 'em walk a plank."

汤姆说：“哦，他们时刻都在欺负人——抢人家的船然后烧掉，得到钱然后把它埋在他们岛上一个可怕的会有鬼看守的地方，然后把船上所有的人杀掉——让他们从悬空的木板上走到海里去。”

"And they carry the women to the island," said Joe; "they don't kill the women."

“还把女人带回岛上，”乔说；“他们不杀女人。”

"No," assented Tom, "they don't kill the women — they're too noble. And the women's always beautiful, too.

“对，”汤姆赞同地说，“他们是不杀女人——他们太高贵了。”而且女人们也往往很漂亮。

"And don't they wear the bulliest clothes! Oh, no! All gold and silver and di'monds," said Joe, with enthusiasm.

“他们难道穿的不是最好的衣服么！哦，是的！他们穿的都是金银和宝石，”乔兴奋地说。

"Who?"said Huck.

“谁？”哈克问。

"Why, the pirates."

“啊？海盗啊。”

Huck scanned his own clothing forlornly.

哈克可怜兮兮地检查了一下他自己的衣服。

"I reckon I ain't dressed fitten for a pirate," said he, with a regretful pathos in his voice; "but I ain't got none but these."

“我想我穿的一点也不像个海盗，”他伤感的说，“但是我也没有别的了。”

But the other boys told him the fine clothes would come fast enough, after they should have begun their adventures. They made him understand that his poor rags would do to begin with, though it was customary for wealthy pirates to start with a proper wardrobe.

但是另外两个孩子告诉他当他们开始他们的冒险后马上就会有好衣服的。他们让他明白了刚开始的话他那些破衣服也是可以的，虽然通常来说阔绰的海盗都应该从一开始就有一衣柜不错的衣服。

Gradually their talk died out and drowsiness began to steal upon the eyelids of the little waifs. The pipe dropped from the fingers of the Red-Handed, and he slept the sleep of the conscience-free and the weary. The Terror of the Seas and the Black Avenger of the Spanish Main had more difficulty in getting to sleep. They said their prayers inwardly, and lying down, since there was nobody there with authority to make them kneel and recite aloud; in truth, they had a mind not to say them at all, but they were afraid to proceed to such lengths as that, lest they might call down a sudden and special thunderbolt from heaven. Then at once they reached and hovered upon the imminent verge of sleep — but an intruder came, now, that would not "down." It was conscience. They began to feel a vague fear that they had been doing wrong to run away; and next they thought of the stolen meat, and then the real torture came.

渐渐的他们的谈话停下了，睡意正在侵袭小流浪儿们的眼皮。烟斗从赤手大盗的手上掉了下去，他无忧无虑且疲惫地睡着了。海上死神和西班牙大陆黑衣复仇者却难以入睡。既然没有什么权威人士逼他们跪下大声祷告，他们就躺在那里小声嘟哝。其实，他们本来根本都想不祷告了的，但是他们又怕不那样做会从天堂降下晴空霹雳。然后他们马上也达到一种将睡未睡的阶段——但是一个入侵者来了，现在，不让他们入睡。那是良心在作祟。他们开始感觉到一种隐约的恐惧，开始有些觉得逃出来是错误的。然后他们又想到那偷来的肉，那才是更真切的折磨。

They tried to argue it away by reminding conscience that they had purloined sweetmeats and apples scores of times; but conscience was not to be appeased by such thin plausibilities; it seemed to them, in the end, that there was no getting around the stubborn fact that taking sweetmeats was only "hooking," while taking bacon and hams and such valuables was plain simple stealing — and there was a command against that in the Bible. So they inwardly resolved that so long as they remained in the business, their piracies should not again be sullied with the crime of stealing. Then conscience granted a truce, and these curiously inconsistent pirates fell peacefully to sleep.

他们试图提醒自己的良心说他们原来偷过好多次糖果和苹果；但是他们的良心还是不能被这种似乎有一点点道理的理由安抚；最后，在他们看来那好像有一个不可争议的事实，那就是拿糖果只是一种“顺手牵羊”，而偷咸猪肉和火腿那样贵重的东西就摆明了是偷了——那可是违背《圣经》的。所以他们暗暗下定决心只要他们还当海盗，他们的海盗事业就不能被偷窃这样的罪过玷污。后来良心就与他们和解了，这些令人不解又矛盾重重的海盗们这才得以平静的入睡。





Chapter 14


第十四章

WHEN Tom awoke in the morning, he wondered where he was . He sat up and rubbed his eyes and looked around. Then he comprehended. It was the cool gray dawn, and there was a delicious sense of repose and peace in the deep pervading calm and silence of the woods. Not a leaf stirred; not a sound obtruded upon great Nature's meditation. Beaded dewdrops stood upon the leaves and grasses. A white layer of ashes covered the fire, and a thin blue breath of smoke rose straight into the air. Joe and Huck still slept.

清晨，汤姆一觉醒来，迷迷糊糊不晓得自己在哪里。他坐起身，揉揉眼，向周围看了看。很快他便想了起来。此时正是凉爽的、灰蒙蒙的黎明时分，静谧四处弥漫开来，一种甜蜜的安详与和平萦绕在小树林里。树叶儿一动也不动，大自然沉沉地睡着，不受任何干扰。露珠儿还挂在树叶和草叶上。一层白色的灰烬覆盖在那堆火上，一缕淡淡的青烟直飘向天空。而乔和哈克都还睡得正香。

Now, far away in the woods a bird called; another answered; presently the hammering of a woodpecker was heard. Gradually the cool dim gray of the morning whitened, and as gradually sounds multiplied and life manifested itself. The marvel of Nature shaking off sleep and going to work unfolded itself to the musing boy.

这时，林子深处有只鸟儿叫了起来，它马上得到了回应。随后又听见一只啄木鸟啄树的声音。暗淡的晨光渐渐发白，各种声音都加入进来，万物恢复生机，一片欣欣向荣。大自然从沉睡中醒来，抖去全身的睡意，把一片奇景展现在这个惊奇的孩子的眼前。

A little green worm came crawling over a dewy leaf, lifting two-thirds of his body into the air from time to time and "sniffing around," then proceeding again — for he was measuring, Tom said; and when the worm approached him, of its own accord, he sat as still as a stone, with his hopes rising and falling, by turns, as the creature still came toward him or seemed inclined to go elsewhere; and when at last it considered a painful moment with its curved body in the air and then came decisively down upon Tom's leg and began a journey over him, his whole heart was glad — for that meant that he was going to have a new suit of clothes — without the shadow of a doubt a gaudy piratical uniform. Now a procession of ants appeared, from nowhere in particular, and went about their labors; one struggled manfully by with a dead spider five times as big as itself in its arms, and lugged it straight up a tree trunk.

一条小青虫从一片带露珠的叶子上爬过来，不时地把大半截身子翘起在空中，四处“嗅一嗅”，接着继续向前爬——汤姆觉得它是在小心打探。这条小虫自动爬近他身边时，他像一块石头一样坐着，满心希望它能爬得再近些。可那条小虫一会儿继续向他爬过来，一会儿又好像改变了主意，转向别的方向。汤姆的心情也随之一会儿高涨，一会儿低落。最后，小虫考虑了好久，总算在空中翘起身子，爬到汤姆腿上来，开始在他身上周游，这让他心里快活极了——因为意味着他将要得到一套新行头——毫无疑问，将是一套光彩夺目的海盗服。这时，不知道从什么地方来了一大群蚂蚁，正忙着搬东西；其中一只用两条前腿抓住一只有自己身体五倍大的死蜘蛛，奋力往前拖，直拖着它爬上了树干。

A brown-spotted ladybug climbed the dizzy height of a grass blade, and Tom bent down close to it and said, "Ladybug, ladybug, fly away home, your house is on fire, your children's alone," and she took wing and went off to see about it — which did not surprise the boy, for he knew of old that this insect was credulous about conflagrations, and he had practiced upon its simplicity more than once. A tumblebug came next, heaving sturdily at its ball, and Tom touched the creature, to see it shut its legs against its body and pretend to be dead. The birds were fairly rioting by this time.

一只背着棕色斑点的花大姐趴在一片草叶的叶尖，汤姆俯下身子靠近它，对它唱：“花大姐，花大姐，快回家，你的家里着火啦，你的娃娃找妈妈。”于是它就拍着薄薄的翅膀飞回家去了，回去看看究竟发生什么事了——汤姆对此一点也不感到奇怪，因为他早知道这种头脑简单的小虫子最容易相信火灾的事情，这种小把戏他屡试不爽。不久，又有一只金龟子飞过来，不屈不挠地搬运一个粪球；汤姆碰了一下这小东西，只见它立刻把腿缩进身体装死。这时鸟儿们叽叽喳喳闹得更欢了。

A catbird, the northern mocker, lit in a tree over Tom's head, and trilled out her imitations of her neighbors in a rapture of enjoyment;

有一只猫鹊——一种北方的学舌鸟——在汤姆头顶上的一棵大树上落下来，模仿着它周围别的鸟儿的叫声，忙得不亦乐乎。

then a shrill jay swept down, a flash of blue flame, and stopped on a twig almost within the boy's reach, cocked his head to one side and eyed the strangers with a consuming curiosity; a gray squirrel and a big fellow of the "fox" kind came scurrying along, sitting up at intervals to inspect and chatter at the boys, for the wild things had probably never seen a human being before and scarcely knew whether to be afraid or not. All Nature was wide awake and stirring, now; long lances of sunlight pierced down through the dense foliage far and near, and a few butterflies came fluttering upon the scene.

随后又有一只樫鸟在空中划过一道弧线，像一团蓝的色火焰，疾翔而下，降落在一根小树枝上，汤姆几乎一伸手就能够到它。它的小脑袋歪向一边，十分好奇地打量着这几位不速之客；还有一只灰色的松鼠和一只狐狸似的大东西匆匆跑来，一会儿坐着观察这几个孩子，一会儿又冲着他们吱吱叫。这些野生动物也许以前从未见过人类，所以根本不知道该不该害怕。这个时候，整个大自然都醒来了，一切都充满了活力。阳光像长矛一般，刺穿了浓密的树叶，在大地上留下一个个圆斑。几只蝴蝶扇着翅膀，在这美景中翩翩起舞。

Tom stirred up the other pirates and they all clattered away with a shout, and in a minute or two were stripped and chasing after and tumbling over each other in the shallow limpid water of the white sandbar. They felt no longing for the little village sleeping in the distance beyond the majestic waste of water. A vagrant current or a slight rise in the river had carried off their raft, but this only gratified them, since its going was something like burning the bridge between them and civilization.

汤姆弄醒了另外两个强盗，他们大叫一声，欢天喜地地跑开了；一两分钟的工夫，他们就已经脱得赤条条的，跳进白沙滩上那片清澈见底的水里互相追逐，滚抱嬉戏。宽阔的河流对面远远的地方，那个小村庄还在睡着，而他们一点也不想念。大概一阵湍流或者一股上涨的潮水，冲走了他们的小木筏吧。但他们却为此感到庆幸。因为冲走了木筏，就像是烧毁了他们与文明世界间的桥梁，同时斩断了他们回去的念头。

They came back to camp wonderfully refreshed, gladhearted, and ravenous; and they soon had the campfire blazing up again. Huck found a spring of clear cold water close by, and the boys made cups of broad oak or hickory leaves, and felt that water, sweetened with such a wildwood charm as that, would be a good enough substitute for coffee. While Joe was slicing bacon for breakfast, Tom and Huck asked him to hold on a minute; they stepped to a promising nook in the riverbank and threw in their lines; almost immediately they had reward. Joe had not had time to get impatient before they were back again with some handsome bass, a couple of sun perch and a small catfish — provisions enough for quite a family. They fried the fish with the bacon and were astonished; for no fish had ever seemed so delicious before. They did not know that the quicker a fresh-water fish is on the fire after he is caught the better he is; and they reflected little upon what a sauce open-air sleeping, open-air exercise, bathing, and a large ingredient of hunger makes, too.

他们回到露营地时，神采奕奕，兴致勃勃，却也饥肠辘辘；很快他们就把篝火又拨旺了。哈克在附近发现了一股清泉，孩子们用阔大的橡树叶或是胡桃树叶做成杯子，他们觉得这泉水里有股森林的天然清香，完全可以取代咖啡。乔正为早餐切咸肉片，汤姆和哈克让他稍等片刻；他们来到河边，选了一个看起来很有潜力的僻静角落，垂下鱼钩。不久就有鱼上钩了。还没到让乔等得不耐烦的时候，他们就拿回来几条漂亮的石首鱼，一对鲈鱼和一条小鲶鱼——这些鱼足够一大家子饱餐一顿了。他们把鱼和咸肉放在一块下锅煎，更是惊喜地发现自己以前还从没吃过这么鲜美的鱼呢！他们不知道淡水鱼越是趁活烧着吃，味道越是鲜美；另外，他们也没有想到露天睡觉、户外运动、洗澡以及空空的肚子会使食欲大增。正因为这些，才让他们觉得这鱼简直是天上的美味啊！

They lay around in the shade, after breakfast, while Huck had a smoke, and then went off through the woods on an exploring expedition. They tramped gayly along, over decaying logs, through tangled underbrush, among solemn monarchs of the forest, hung from their crowns to the ground with a drooping regalia of grapevines. Now and then they came upon snug nooks carpeted with grass and jeweled with flowers.

吃完早饭，他们就往树荫底下随便一躺，哈克抽了一袋烟；然后大家钻进树林去探险。他们自由自在林地四处游荡，一路跨过朽木，经过灌木丛，穿过高大的树木林。一根根葡萄藤从树冠上垂落下来，好像国王王冠上垂下的流苏。他们时不时地遇到一些幽静的小角落，地面长满青草，绽放鲜花，宛如块块镶着宝石的绿色地毯。

They found plenty of things to be delighted with, but nothing to be astonished at. They discovered that the island was about three miles long and a quarter of a mile wide, and that the shore it lay closest to was only separated from it by a narrow channel hardly two hundred yards wide. They took a swim about every hour, so it was close upon the middle of the afternoon when they got back to camp. They were too hungry to stop to fish, but they fared sumptuously upon cold ham, and then threw themselves down in the shade to talk. But the talk soon began to drag, and then died. The stillness, the solemnity that brooded in the woods, and the sense of loneliness, began to tell upon the spirits of the boys. They fell to thinking. A sort of undefined longing crept upon them. This took dim shape, presently — it was budding homesickness. Even Finn the Red-Handed was dreaming of his doorsteps and empty hogsheads. But they were all ashamed of their weakness, and none was brave enough to speak his thought.

他们一路看到了很多令人欣喜的东西，但并没有什么特别稀奇古怪的玩意儿。他们发现这个岛大约有三英里长，四分之一英里宽，离河岸最近的地方只有一条狭窄的水道相隔，还不足二百码宽。每过半小时他们就去游上一次泳，所以等他们回到宿营地时，半个下午都已过去了。他们饿坏了，顾不得停下来捉鱼就坐下吃起来，对着冷火腿，就是一番狼吞虎咽，吃罢就躺到荫凉下聊天。聊着聊着就断断续续了，终于他们止住了话头。四周的寂静、森林中的肃穆以及孤独感，慢慢地对这几个孩子的情绪发生了作用。他们陷入沉思。一种莫名的渴望渐渐爬上他们心头——很快这渴望越来越清晰，原来是逐渐强烈的思乡情绪。连赤手大盗费恩都在做梦搬地回忆着他从前睡觉的台阶和那些大空桶。但是他们都对这种软弱感到害臊，没有一个人有勇气把心事对大家说出来。

For some time, now, the boys had been dully conscious of a peculiar sound in the distance, just as one sometimes is of the ticking of a clock which he takes no distinct note of. But now this mysterious sound became more pronounced, and forced a recognition. The boys started, glanced at each other, and then each assumed a listening attitude. There was a long silence, profound and unbroken; then a deep, sullen boom came floating down out of the distance.

有一段时间，几个孩子隐隐约约地听到远处传来一种奇怪的声响，有点像你不特别留神时听到的钟摆的滴嗒声。但后来这神秘的声响越来越大，他们不得不弄个清楚。孩子们愣了一下，对望了一眼，接着作出侧耳细听的样子。可过了好久都没有声音，只有一片死寂；后来，一阵沉闷的隆隆声从远处滚滚传来。

"What is it!" exclaimed Joe, under his breath.

“什么声音！”乔压低声音惊呼道。

"I wonder," said Tom in a whisper.

“我也不清楚。”汤姆小声说。

" 'Tain't thunder," said Huckleberry, in an awed tone, "becuz thunder —"

“不像是雷声啊，”哈克贝利说，声音里带着惊恐，“因为雷声——”

"Hark!" said Tom. "Listen — don't talk."

“你们听！”汤姆说，“听着——别出声。”

They waited a time that seemed an age, and then the same muffled boom troubled the solemn hush.

他们等啊等啊，像过了好多年似的，才又有一阵沉闷的隆隆响声划破天空。

"Let's go and see."

“走，去看看。”

They sprang to their feet and hurried to the shore toward the town. They parted the bushes on the bank and peered out over the water. The little steam ferryboat was about a mile below the village, drifting with the current. Her broad deck seemed crowded with people. There were a great many skiffs rowing about or floating with the stream in the neighborhood of the ferryboat, but the boys could not determine what the men in them were doing. Presently a great jet of white smoke burst from the ferryboat's side, and as it expanded and rose in a lazy cloud, that same dull throb of sound was borne to the listeners again.

他们脚上装了弹簧似的，一下子跳了起来，赶忙朝镇子方向的河岸边跑去。他们拨开河边的灌木丛，偷偷地往水面上瞧。那只摆渡用的小蒸汽船在镇子下游大约一英里的地方，顺流而下。那宽大的甲板上看上去像是站满了人。除此之外还有许多小船在渡船附近划动，随着水流漂来漂去，可孩子们却吃不准船上的人在干什么。后来，渡船的一边突地冒出来一大股白烟，它像闲云一般扩散升腾开来。与此同时，那种沉闷的声音又灌进他们的耳鼓。

"I know now!" exclaimed Tom; "somebody's drownded!"

“我知道了！”汤姆大喊道，“有人淹死了！”

"That's it!" said Huck; "they done that last summer, when Bill Turner got drownded; they shoot a cannon over the water, and that makes him come up to the top. Yes, and they take loaves of bread and put quicksilver in 'em and set 'em afloat, and wherever there's anybody that's drownded, they'll float right there and stop."

“就是这么回事！”哈克说，“去年夏天，比尔·特纳掉到水里时，他们也是这么干的；他们向水面上打炮，这能让落水的人浮到水面上来。对，他们还用大块面包，灌上水银，放在水面上浮着。无论什么地方有人落水，面包就会径直漂过去，停在出事地点。”

"Yes, I've heard about that," said Joe. "I wonder what makes the bread do that."

“对，我也听说过这事，”乔说，“不知道是什么给了面包这种神奇的力量。”

"Oh, it ain't the bread, so much," said Tom; "I reckon it's mostly what they say over it before they start it out."

“哦，大概不是面包本身有什么特别的，”汤姆说，“我猜多半是人们事先给它施了魔咒。”

"But they don't say anything over it," said Huck. "I've seen 'em and they don't."

“他们可没念什么咒语呀，”哈克说，“我亲眼所见，他们没念咒语。”

"Well, that's funny," said Tom. "But maybe they say it to themselves. Of course they do. Anybody might know that."

“唉，那就怪了，”汤姆说，“也许他们只是在心里默念吧。不过他们肯定念咒，这是毋庸置疑的。”

The other boys agreed that there was reason in what Tom said, because an ignorant lump of bread, uninstructed by an incantation, could not be expected to act very intelligently when sent upon an errand of such gravity.

另外两个孩子都认为汤姆说得很有道理。面包没有知觉，如果不是有人给它念咒语，让它去干这么重大的事情，决不会干得那么出色。

"By jings, I wish I was over there, now," said Joe.

“哎呀，现在要是我也在现场就好了。”乔说。

"I do too," said Huck. "I'd give heaps to know who it is."

“我也这么想，”哈克说。“要是有人能告诉我到底谁被淹死了，我愿意拿很多东西来跟他交换。”

The boys still listened and watched. Presently a revealing thought flashed through Tom's mind, and he exclaimed: "Boys, I know who's drownded — it's us!"

几个孩子继续在那儿听着，看着。突然汤姆脑海里灵光一闪，他恍然大悟地喊道：“伙计们，我知道是谁淹死了——就是咱们呀！”

They felt like heroes in an instant. Here was a gorgeous triumph; they were missed; they were mourned; hearts were breaking on their account; tears were being shed; accusing memories of unkindnesses to these poor lost lads were rising up, and unavailing regrets and remorse were being indulged; and best of all, the departed were the talk of the whole town, and the envy of all the boys, as far as this dazzling notoriety was concerned. This was fine. It was worth while to be a pirate, after all.

他们立刻觉得自己宛然成了英雄。这可真是个可喜可贺的胜利。由此可见还有人惦记他们，有人哀悼他们，有人为他们伤心，有人为他们痛哭流涕。那些人一想到自己曾经对这几个失踪的苦孩子怎么怎么不好，就觉得良心受到谴责，愧疚不已，可这时已经太晚啦。顶顶重要的是，全镇子的男女老少现在一定都在谈论这几个淹死的人，而别的孩子见他们如此声名显赫，肯定既羡慕又忌妒。真不赖哩。一句话，这海盗当得太值了！

As twilight drew on, the ferryboat went back to her accustomed business and the skiffs disappeared. The pirates returned to camp. They were jubilant with vanity over their new grandeur and the illustrious trouble they were making. They caught fish, cooked supper and ate it, and then fell to guessing at what the village was thinking and saying about them; and the pictures they drew of the public distress on their account were gratifying to look upon — from their point of view. But when the shadows of night closed them in, they gradually ceased to talk, and sat gazing into the fire, with their minds evidently wandering elsewhere. The excitement was gone, now, and Tom and Joe could not keep back thoughts of certain persons at home who were not enjoying this fine frolic as much as they were. Misgivings came; they grew troubled and unhappy; a sigh or two escaped, unawares. By and by Joe timidly ventured upon a roundabout "feeler" as to how the others might look upon a return to civilization — not right now, but —

天色渐晚，渡船又回到镇口摆渡去了，刚才的小船都不见了踪影。海盗们也得意洋洋地回到了他们的宿营地。他们想到自己刚刚获得的荣耀，还有给镇里人惹的巨大的麻烦，感到心满意足，高兴极了。他们捉了鱼，做了晚饭，饱餐一顿后，就猜想起镇里人会怎么想，怎么说他们；想象着人们为他们急得团团转，担心难过的情形，心里十分满意——当然这只是他们自己的感觉。可是，当茫茫夜色将他们包围，他们就渐渐停止了谈话，坐在一起，眼睛直勾勾地望着火堆，心思却不知道已经飘到哪儿去了。这会儿，兴奋劲儿过去了，汤姆和乔不由自主地想起了家里人。那些人绝对不会发现这些过火玩笑的有趣之处。一阵不安袭上心头。他们担心起来，心情越来越沉重，情不自禁地叹了一两口气。后来乔小心翼翼地抹着弯儿试探另外两个海盗的意思，想知道他们对回去文明世界去抱什么态度——当然不是马上就回去，只是——

Tom withered him with derision! Huck, being uncommitted as yet, joined in with Tom, and the waverer quickly "explained," and was glad to get out of the scrape with as little taint of chicken-hearted homesickness clinging to his garments as he could. Mutiny was effectually laid to rest for the moment.

汤姆奚落了他一番，给他泼了瓢冷水。刚刚没来得及插上话的哈克现在站在了汤姆一边。于是那个动摇分子马上为自己“辩护”，极力给自己开脱，不想让胆小、想家的毛病损害了自己形象。叛乱总算暂时平定了下来。

As the night deepened, Huck began to nod, and presently to snore. Joe followed next. Tom lay upon his elbow motionless, for some time, watching the two intently. At last he got up cautiously, on his knees, and went searching among the grass and the flickering reflections flung by the campfire. He picked up and inspected several large semicylinders of the thin white bark of a sycamore, and finally chose two which seemed to suit him. Then he knelt by the fire and painfully wrote something upon each of these with his "red keel"; one he rolled up and put in his jacket pocket, and the other he put in Joe's hat and removed it to a little distance from the owner. And he also put into the hat certain schoolboy treasures of almost inestimable value — among them a lump of chalk, an India-rubber ball, three fishhooks, and one of that kind of marbles known as a "sure-'nough crystal." Then he tiptoed his way cautiously among the trees till he felt that he was out of hearing, and straightway broke into a keen run in the direction of the sandbar.

伴随着渐渐降临的夜色，哈克打起盹来，不久便鼾声大作。乔也跟着进入了梦乡。汤姆用胳膊肘支着头，一动不动地盯着他们俩，看了好一会儿。最后，他双膝撑地小心地站起来，在草地里和篝火的闪亮处仔细搜寻。他捡起几块半圆形的梧桐树的白色薄皮，仔细看了看，最后挑了两块中意的。接着他在火堆旁跪下，用他那块红色的砚石在树皮上吃力地写了几个字；他卷起其中一块树皮，放到上衣的口袋里，另一块放在乔的帽子里，他把帽子挪得离主人远了一点，又在里面放了些被小学生视为无价之宝的东西——一截粉笔、一个橡皮球、三个钓鱼钩和一块叫做“纯水晶球”的石头。然后他就踮着脚尖，非常谨慎地从树林中溜出去，直到后来认为别人已经听不见他的脚步声，便急匆匆地向沙滩那边飞奔而去。





Chapter 15


第十五章

A few minutes later Tom was in the shoal water of the bar, wading toward the Illinois shore. Before the depth reached his middle he was halfway over; the current would permit no more wading, now, so he struck out confidently to swim the remaining hundred yards. He swam quartering upstream, but still was swept downward rather faster than he had expected. However, he reached the shore finally, and drifted along till he found a low place and drew himself out. He put his hand on his jacket pocket, found his piece of bark safe, and then struck through the woods, following the shore, with streaming garments. Shortly before ten o'clock he came out into an open place opposite the village, and saw the ferryboat lying in the shadow of the trees and the high bank. Everything was quiet under the blinking stars. He crept down the bank, watching with all his eyes, slipped into the water, swam three or four strokes and climbed into the skiff that did "yawl" duty at the boat's stern. He laid himself down under the thwarts and waited, panting.

几分钟之后，汤姆就到达了沙洲的浅水滩，向伊利诺斯州趟过去。趟到河中间时，水还不到腰部；后来流水越来越急，趟水过河是不行了，他就很自信地决定游完剩下的一百码。他奋力地向上游游去，可是河水老是要把他往下游冲，流速比他想象的要快得多。最后他还是游到了岸边，接着在水上漂了一段，直到找到了一处较低的河堤才爬上了岸。他摸了摸上一口袋，发觉树皮还在，就钻进河边的树林，身上的水淋淋漓漓地滴了一路。将近十点钟的时候，他从树林里走出来，来到镇子对面的一块开阔地。高高的河堤和堤上的树木在月光下将影子投在水面上，昨天的那艘渡船正好停在阴影里。天空中星辰闪烁，大地上万籁俱寂。他蹑手蹑脚地溜下河堤，睁大眼睛四处张望，然后潜入水中，游了三四下，就爬到船尾那只“突突”待命的小艇上了。他躺在坐板下面，气喘吁吁地等着开船。

Presently the cracked bell tapped and a voice gave the order to "cast off." A minute or two later the skiff 's head was standing high up, against the boat's swell, and the voyage was begun. Tom felt happy in his success, for he knew it was the boat's last trip for the night. At the end of a long twelve or fifteen minutes the wheels stopped, and Tom slipped overboard and swam ashore in the dusk, landing fifty yards downstream, out of danger of possible stragglers.

不久，船上的破钟敲响了，有人下达了“开船”的命令。一两分钟以后，小艇的船头被渡船卷起的排浪冲得直竖起来，航程开始了。汤姆庆幸自己成功赶上了这班船，他知道这可是当晚的最后一次摆渡了。好不容易熬过了漫长的十二到十五分钟，渡船终于停了下来，汤姆从小艇上溜下水，在暮色中向岸边游去，为了不让人看见，他在下游五十码的地方上了岸。

He flew along unfrequented alleys, and shortly found himself at his aunt's back fence. He climbed over, approached the "ell" and looked in at the sitting room window, for a light was burning there.There sat Aunt Polly, Sid, Mary, and Joe Harper's mother, grouped together, talking. They were by the bed, and the bed was between them and the door. Tom went to the door and began to softly lift the latch; then he pressed gently and the door yielded a crack; he continued pushing cautiously, and quaking every time it creaked, till he judged he might squeeze through on his knees, so he put his head through and began, warily.

他飞快地穿过冷清的小巷，转眼间就到了姨妈家的后院围墙下。他翻过围墙，走近侧房，只见客厅的窗户里还有光亮，便屋里朝里张望。波莉姨妈、希德、玛丽坐在一块，还有乔·哈帕的妈妈，大家正在谈话。他们坐在床边，床摆在他们和门之间。汤姆走到门边，轻轻地拨开门闩，随后慢慢地推了一下，门“吱”的一声开了一条缝。他又小心翼翼地推门。每次门响一声，他都吓得发抖，后来他估计可以趴着挤进去时，就把头先伸进去，心惊胆战地开始往里爬。

"What makes the candle blow so?" said Aunt Polly. Tom hurried up. "Why that door's open, I believe. Why of course it is. No end of strange things now. Go 'long and shut it, Sid."

“烛光怎么摇得这么厉害？”波利姨妈问。汤姆加快速度急急忙忙地往里爬。“唉，我想一定是门开了。唉，门果然开着，怪事还真是没完没了了。希德，去把门关上。”

Tom disappeared under the bed just in time. He lay and "breathed" himself for a time, and then crept to where he could almost touch his aunt's foot.

汤姆这时刚好藏到了床底下。他躺在那里，等“缓过气来”之后，又爬得近了些，几乎能碰到姨妈的脚。

"But as I was saying," said Aunt Polly, "he warn't bad, so to say — only mischeevous. Only just giddy, and harumscarum, you know. He warn't any more responsible than a colt. He never meant any harm, and he was the best-hearted boy that ever was" — and she began to cry.

“但是，就像我刚才说的，”波莉姨妈说，“他本质不坏，可以这么说——他不过是淘气罢了，有点浮躁，整天冒冒失失的。他只不过还是个毛孩子，没有一点坏心眼，我从来还没见过像他那么心地善良的孩子。哎……” 她开始哭了起来。

"It was just so with my Joe — always full of his devilment, and up to every kind of mischief, but he was just as unselfish and kind as he could be — and laws bless me, to think I went and whipped him for taking that cream, never once recollecting that I throwed it out myself because it was sour, and I never to see him again in this world, never, never, never, poor abused boy!" And Mrs. Harper sobbed as if her heart would break.

“我的乔也是这样——调皮捣蛋，什么淘气的事都有他一份。可他不自私，心眼好。天哪！想起揍他的事，我就难过。我以为他偷吃了奶油，不分青红皂白地拿鞭子抽了他一顿，压根没想起来奶油酸了，是我亲手倒掉的。好了，这下子，我再也不能活着见到他了，永远、永远、永远也见不着了。这个可怜的、受尽虐待的孩子啊！”接着哈帕太太便心碎地泣不成声了。

"I hope Tom's better off where he is," said Sid, "but if he'd been better in some ways —"

“不论现在汤姆在哪儿，我都希望他过得很快活，”希德说，“不过他以前有些事确实干得不怎么样……”

"Sid!" Tom felt the glare of the old lady's eye, though he could not see it. "Not a word against my Tom, now that he's gone! God'll take care of him — never you trouble yourself, sir! Oh, Mrs. Harper, I don't know how to give him up! I don't know how to give him up!He was such a comfort to me, although he tormented my old heart out of me, 'most."

“希德！”汤姆尽管看不清，但却感觉到老太太是瞪着眼睛在跟希德讲话。“我的汤姆已经走了，不许你再说他一句坏话！老天爷会好好照顾他的——用不着您来操心，我的先生！哦，哈帕太太，我真不知道怎样才能忘掉他！我真不知道怎样才能忘掉他！虽然他从前常折磨我这把老骨头，但他毕竟也给了我极大的安慰啊。”

"The Lord giveth and the Lord hath taken away — Blessed be the name of the Lord! But it's so hard — Oh, it's so hard! Only last Saturday my Joe busted a firecracker right under my nose and I knocked him sprawling. Little did I know then, how soon — Oh, if it was to do over again I'd hug him and bless him for it."

“上帝把他们赐给我们，却又把他们收回去了，——感谢上帝！可这太残酷了——啊，实在让人受不了！就在上星期六，我的乔在我脚底下放了个爆竹，我就把他打趴在了地上。谁知道这么快他就……啊，如果一切能从头再来一次，我一定会搂着他，夸他干得好。”

"Yes, yes, yes, I know just how you feel, Mrs. Harper, I know just exactly how you feel. No longer ago than yesterday noon, my Tom took and filled the cat full of Painkiller, and I did think the cretur would tear the house down. And God forgive me, I cracked Tom's head with my thimble, poor boy, poor dead boy. But he's out of all his troubles now. And the last words I ever heard him say was to reproach —"

“是啊，是啊，是啊，我理解你的心情，哈帕太太，我完全理解。就在昨天中午，我的汤姆逮住家里的猫给它灌了很多止痛药，那时我都怀疑它会把房子给撕烂了。老天啊，原谅我吧，我拿顶针敲了汤姆的头，可怜的孩子，我那可怜的短命的孩子啊。不过，现在他总算脱离苦海了。我听见他说的最后几句话就是责备我……”

But this memory was too much for the old lady, and she broke entirely down. Tom was snuffling, now, himself — and more in pity of himself than anybody else. He could hear Mary crying, and putting in a kindly word for him from time to time. He began to have a nobler opinion of himself than ever before. Still, he was sufficiently touched by his aunt's grief to long to rush out from under the bed and overwhelm her with joy — and the theatrical gorgeousness of the thing appealed strongly to his nature, too, but he resisted and lay still.

老太太说着说着，就让自己的回忆打倒了，伤心得实在说不下去，她一下子放声哭起来。此时的汤姆鼻子也发起酸来——这倒不是他在同情别人，而是在可怜自己。他听见玛丽也在哭，还时不时为他说上一两句好话。他从没有像现在这样感到自己不简单。还有，姨妈伤心的样子也深深打动了汤姆，他真想从床下面冲出来，让她惊喜欲狂——再说汤姆本来就十分喜欢制造些戏剧性的场面，但这一次他却沉住气，没有动弹。

He went on listening, and gathered by odds and ends that it was conjectured at first that the boys had got drowned while taking a swim; then the small raft had been missed; next, certain boys said the missing lads had promised that the village should "hear something" soon; the wiseheads had "put this and that together" and decided that the lads had gone off on that raft and would turn up at the next town below, presently; but toward noon the raft had been found, lodged against the Missouri shore some five or six miles below the village — and then hope perished; they must be drowned, else hunger would have driven them home by nightfall if not sooner. It was believed that the search for the bodies had been a fruitless effort merely because the drowning must have occurred in midchannel, since the boys, being good swimmers, would otherwise have escaped to shore. This was Wednesday night. If the bodies continued missing until Sunday, all hope would be given over, and the funerals would be preached on that morning. Tom shuddered.

他继续听着，从零零星星的谈话中得知，开头人们以为几个孩子在游泳的时候淹死了；其后他们又发现那只小木筏不见了；接着又有些孩子说这几个失踪的孩子曾暗示过镇上不久将“有重大新闻”；那些自认聪明的人根据东拼西凑的消息断定几个小家伙一定是撑着小木筏出去了，不久就会在下游的村镇里出现；但是时近中午，人们发现木筏停在镇子下游五六英里的密西西比河岸边——可孩子们不在上边，于是希望成了泡影；他们准是淹死了，否则的话，不要到天黑，他们就会饿得回家来。大家认为打捞尸体根本是白费劲，因为几个孩子一定是在河中间淹死的，要不然，凭他们那么好的水性，早就游回岸上来了。今天是星期三晚上。要是到星期天还找不着尸体的话，那就什么希望都没了，星期天早上就举行丧礼。汤姆听到这里，不禁打了个冷战。

Mrs. Harper gave a sobbing good night and turned to go. Then with a mutual impulse the two bereaved women flung themselves into each other's arms and had a good, consoling cry, and then parted. Aunt Polly was tender far beyond her wont, in her good night to Sid and Mary. Sid snuffled a bit and Mary went off crying with all her heart.

哈帕太太带着哭腔道了声晚安就转身要走。这时这两个失去亲人的女人忽然一阵激动，抱在一起痛哭起来，哭够之后才分手。波莉姨妈在与希德和玛丽道别时，一反常态，显得万分温柔。希德有点抽鼻子，玛丽却是大哭着走的。

Aunt Polly knelt down and prayed for Tom so touchingly, so appealingly, and with such measureless love in her words and her old trembling voice, that he was weltering in tears again, long before she was through.

波莉姨妈跪下来为汤姆祈祷。她的祈祷如怨如泣，令人感动。汤姆听见她老人家颤抖的声音，话语里充满无限爱意，还没有等她说完他已是泪流满面了。

He had to keep still long after she went to bed, for she kept making brokenhearted ejaculations from time to time, tossing unrestfully, and turning over. But at last she was still, only moaning a little in her sleep. Now the boy stole out, rose gradually by the bedside, shaded the candlelight with his hand, and stood regarding her. His heart was full of pity for her. He took out his sycamore scroll and placed it by the candle. But something occurred to him, and he lingered considering. His face lighted with a happy solution of his thought; he put the bark hastily in his pocket. Then he bent over and kissed the faded lips, and straightway made his stealthy exit, latching the door behind him.

汤姆知道只能等姨妈睡着了才能出来，可波莉姨妈上床以后很久，因为伤心至极，还不时地发出长吁短叹，辗转反侧，久久不能入睡。但到后来，她终于睡着了，只不过偶尔还能听到一两声的呻吟声。于是汤姆便从床底下钻出来，慢慢地站起身，用手挡住烛光，站在床边细细端详着她，心里对她充满了怜悯。他从口袋里捣出梧桐树皮，放在蜡烛旁边。可是他忽然想起了什么事，犹豫了一下。他面露喜色，作出了一个愉快的决定，同时赶忙把树皮放回到口袋里。接着他弯下腰来，吻了吻姨妈那憔悴的嘴唇，就悄悄地径直向门口走去，走时还没忘了把门闩好。

He threaded his way back to the ferry landing, found nobody at large there, and walked boldly on board the boat, for he knew she was tenantless except that there was a watchman, who always turned in and slept like a graven image. He untied the skiff at the stern, slipped into it, and was soon rowing cautiously upstream. When he had pulled a mile above the village, he started quartering across and bent himself stoutly to his work. He hit the landing on the other side neatly, for this was a familiar bit of work to him. He was moved to capture the skiff, arguing that it might be considered a ship and therefore legitimate prey for a pirate, but he knew a thorough search would be made for it and that might end in revelations. So he stepped ashore and entered the wood.

他左拐右拐，回到了渡船码头，发现那里没人走动，就大胆地上了船。他知道船上只有一个守船人，而他总是睡觉，一睡起来像尊雕像似的。他解开船尾的小艇，悄悄跳上去，很快就小心翼翼地向上游划去。他先向村子上游划了有一英里，然后调转船头，全力以赴，冲着对岸径直划过去。他很娴熟地就靠上了岸，这对他来说已经只是小菜一碟了。他很想把这只小船据为己有，因为完全可以把它看作一艘大船，因此而被海盗强夺过来，正是情理之中。但他转念一想，人们一定会四处搜寻这艘船，一不小心，反而会将事情败露，所以他就弃舟登岸，钻进了树林。

He sat down and took a long rest, torturing himself meantime to keep awake, and then started warily down the homestretch. The night was far spent. It was broad daylight before he found himself fairly abreast the island bar. He rested again until the sun was well up and gilding the great river with its splendor, and then he plunged into the stream. A little later he paused, dripping, upon the threshold of the camp, and heard Joe say:

他坐下来，歇了好一阵子，同时拼命克制住睡意，然后又小心谨慎地向露营地所在的河湾走去。此时夜晚就快要结束了。等他走到岛上的沙滩时，天已大亮。他又歇了一歇，直到太阳当空，光芒四射，宽阔的河面上波光粼粼，他又往河里纵身一跳。一小会儿之后，他浑身水淋淋地站在宿营地的门口，听见乔说：

"No, Tom's true-blue, Huck, and he'll come back. He won't desert. He knows that would be a disgrace to a pirate, and Tom's too proud for that sort of thing. He's up to something or other. Now I wonder what?"

“不会的，汤姆是最守信用的，哈克，他会回来。他不会抛弃我们。他知道这样做对一个海盗来说太不体面了，像汤姆这样爱面子的人，是决不会干出这种事情的。他一定是有事出去了。不过，他究竟干什么去了呢？”

"Well, the things is ours, anyway, ain't they?"

“哎，不管怎么说，这些玩意儿归我们了，对不对？”

"Pretty near, but not yet, Huck. The writing says they are if he ain't back here to breakfast."

“差不多吧，不过还不能肯定，哈克。他留的纸条说，如果吃早饭时，他还没来的话，这些东西就归我们了。”

"Which he is!" exclaimed Tom, with fine dramatic effect, stepping grandly into camp.

“说来就来！”汤姆大喊一声，像演戏一样，神气十足地大步走了进来。

A sumptuous breakfast of bacon and fish was shortly provided, and as the boys set to work upon it, Tom recounted (and adorned) his adventures. They were a vain and boastful company of heroes when the tale was done. Then Tom hid himself away in a shady nook to sleep till noon, and the other pirates got ready to fish and explore.

不久，一顿丰盛的咸肉加鲜鱼的早餐便端了上来，孩子们围坐着，一边大口大口吃早饭，一边听汤姆讲述了他回家的经历，其中不乏添油加醋的情节。汤姆说罢，他们成了一群虚荣心强、自命不凡的英雄。然后汤姆就躲到一个阴凉幽静的地方去睡觉，一直睡到中午。其余两个海盗，则忙着为钓鱼和探险做准备。





Chapter 16


第十六章

AFTER dinner all the gang turned out to hunt for turtle eggs on the bar. They went about poking sticks into the sand, and when they found a soft place they went down on their knees and dug with their hands. Sometimes they would take fifty or sixty eggs out of one hole. They were perfectly round white things a trifle smaller than an English walnut. They had a famous fried egg feast that night, and another on Friday morning.

午饭以后，海盗帮全体出动去沙洲上找乌龟蛋。他们用树枝往沙子里戳，发现软的地方，就跪下来用手挖。有时候，他们一窝就能挖出五六十只乌龟蛋来。这些蛋白色的蛋圆溜溜的，比胡桃还小一点。那天晚上，他们吃了一顿美味可口的煎蛋，星期五早上又饱餐了一回。

After breakfast they went whooping and prancing out on the bar, and chased each other round and round, shedding clothes as they went, until they were naked, and then continued the frolic far away up the shoal water of the bar, against the stiff current, which latter tripped their legs from under them from time to time and greatly increased the fun.

早饭后，他们欢呼雀跃地奔向沙洲。他们相互追逐，绕着圈圈跑，一边脱掉身上的衣服，等全身脱个精光后，继续嬉闹，一直跑到沙洲的浅滩上，逆着水流站着，水流从他们腿上冲过，不时地要把他们冲倒，这大大增加了玩水的乐趣。

And now and then they stooped in a group and splashed water in each other's faces with their palms, gradually approaching each other with averted faces to avoid the strangling sprays, and finally gripping and struggling till the best man ducked his neighbor, and then they all went under in a tangle of white legs and arms, and came up blowing, sputtering, laughing, and gasping for breath at one and the same time.

有时候，他们弯下腰站在一块，互相用手掌往对方脸上击水。大家越击越近，头扭向一边，以免被水呛着。最后，他们扭成一团，奋力拼搏，直到弱者被按到水里，这时大家一齐钻进水里，几双雪白的胳膊和腿在水中缠在一起，然后猛地钻出水面。水花四散飞溅，他们一面喷水，一面哈哈大笑，气喘如牛。

When they were well exhausted, they would run out and sprawl on the dry, hot sand, and lie there and cover themselves up with it, and by and by break for the water again and go through the original performance once more. Finally it occurred to them that their naked skin represented flesh-colored "tights" very fairly; so they drew a ring in the sand and had a circus — with three clowns in it, for none would yield this proudest post to his neighbor.

玩到累得不行，他们就跑回岸上，四脚朝天，往又干又热的沙滩的一躺，把自己埋到沙里。休息一会儿，就又冲进水里，再打一次水仗。后来他们忽然想起，自己裸露的皮肤简直就是肉色的“紧身衣”，于是他们就在沙滩上划了个大圈，开始演马戏——由于互不相让，谁也不愿失去扮演这最神气角色的机会，台上出现了三个小丑。

Next they got their marbles and played "knucks" and "ringtaw" and "keeps" till that amusement grew stale. Then Joe and Huck had another swim, but Tom would not venture, because he found that in kicking off his trousers he had kicked his string of rattlesnake rattles off his ankle, and he wondered how he had escaped cramp so long without the protection of this mysterious charm. He did not venture again until he had found it, and by that time the other boys were tired and ready to rest. They gradually wandered apart, dropped into the "dumps," and fell to gazing longingly across the wide river to where the village lay drowsing in the sun. Tom found himself writing "Becky" in the sand with his big toe; he scratched it out, and was angry with himself for his weakness. But he wrote it again, nevertheless; he could not help it. He erased it once more and then took himself out of temptation by driving the other boys together and joining them.

再后来，他们拿出石头弹子，玩“补锅”、“敲锅”和“碰着就赢”，直到玩腻了才停下来。然后乔和哈克又去游泳，汤姆却没敢去冒这个险，因为他发现刚才踢掉裤子的时候，把拴在脚踝上的一串响尾轮也一起踢飞了。他不禁纳闷没有这个护身符保佑，刚才玩闹这么久，居然没有出事。直到他找回了护身符，才敢再去玩，但这时另外两个伙伴已经玩累了，正准备好好歇一歇。于是他们各走各的，没了玩的兴致，眼睛望着宽阔的大河对岸出神，那里他们向往的小镇正在阳光下昏昏欲睡。汤姆发现自己不由自主地用脚趾头在沙滩上写“贝基”。他把字迹抹掉，对自己的意志薄弱大为恼火。然而，他还是情不自禁地又写了这个名字。他再一次把名字擦掉，为了防止自己再写下去，他把两个伙伴重新聚到一起，和他们一块儿玩起来。

But Joe's spirits had gone down almost beyond resurrection. He was so homesick that he could hardly endure the misery of it. The tears lay very near the surface. Huck was melancholy, too. Tom was downhearted, but tried hard not to show it. He had a secret which he was not ready to tell, yet, but if this mutinous depression was not broken up soon, he would have to bring it out. He said, with a great show of cheerfulness:

但是乔的情绪还是很低落，不可能恢复刚才的高兴劲了。他想家得不得了，泪水在眼眶里直打转儿。哈克也闷闷不乐。汤姆虽然也垂头丧气，却尽力不让他们看出来。他有一个秘密，原本不打算现在就说出来，但眼下得快点打破这股消沉的士气，他不得不亮出这张王牌了。他露出兴高采烈的样子说：

"I bet there's been pirates on this island before, boys.We'll explore it again. They've hid treasures here somewhere. How'd you feel to light on a rotten chest full of gold and silver — hey?"

“伙计们，我敢打赌海盗们来过这个小岛，我们得再去探险。他们一定把珠宝藏在这个岛的某个地方了。要是我们碰到一个破箱子，里面装满了金银财宝，你们会怎么想？”

But it roused only a faint enthusiasm, which faded out, with no reply. Tom tried one or two other seductions; but they failed, too. It was discouraging work. Joe sat poking up the sand with a stick and looking very gloomy. Finally he said:

两个伙伴没答理他，刚起来的一点劲头也随之消失了。汤姆又试着用另外一两件事情来诱惑他们，可均以失败告终。真是让人扫兴。乔坐在那里用小树枝拨弄沙子，一脸的阴郁。最后他说：

"Oh, boys, let's give it up. I want to go home. It's so lonesome."

“喂，我说，伙计们，咱们还是算了吧。我要回家，待在这里实在是太寂寞了。”

"Oh no, Joe, you'll feel better by and by," said Tom. "Just think of the fishing that's here."

“嘿，乔，别这样。你会慢慢觉得好起来的，”汤姆说，“你想想，我们在这儿钓鱼是多开心啊！”

"I don't care for fishing. I want to go home."

“我才不喜欢钓鱼呢。我要回家。”

"But, Joe, there ain't such another swimming place anywhere."

“但是，乔，你见过比这更好的游泳胜地吗？”

"Swimming's no good. I don't seem to care for it, somehow, when there ain't anybody to say I shan't go in. I mean to go home."

“能游泳又怎么样了？我可不在乎。就算现在有人说禁止我下水，我也没觉得怎么样。我就是要回家。”

"Oh, shucks! Baby! You want to see your mother, I reckon."

“哦，真差劲！你还当自己是哭着闹着找妈妈的小宝宝哪。”

"Yes, I do want to see my mother — and you would, too, if you had one. I ain't any more baby than you are." And Joe snuffled a little.

“对，我就是要去找我妈妈——要是你也有妈妈，你肯定也会想去找她的。你可不比我好多少。”说着说着，乔竟然抽起鼻子来了。

"Well, we'll let the crybaby go home to his mother, won't we, Huck? Poor thing — does it want to see its mother? And so it shall. You like it here, don't you, Huck? We'll stay, won't we?"

“好吧，好吧，咱们就让这个好哭的小鬼回家去找妈妈，你说呢，哈克？真是条可怜虫——他不是要去找妈妈么？就随他去好了。你肯定是喜欢这儿的，对不对，哈克？就咱俩留在这儿，怎么样？”

Huck said "Y-e-s" — without any heart in it.

哈克心不在焉地答了声：“也——行。”

"I'll never speak to you again as long as I live," said Joe, rising. "There now!" And he moved moodily away and began to dress himself.

“我到死都不理你了，”乔说着站起身来，“咱们等着瞧！”他沉着脸走到一边，开始重新穿上衣服。

"Who cares!" said Tom. "Nobody wants you to. Go 'long home and get laughed at. Oh, you're a nice pirate. Huck and me ain't crybabies. We'll stay, won't we, Huck? Let him go if he wants to. I reckon we can get along without him, per'aps."

“谁稀罕！”汤姆说。“可没谁会想跟你说话。滚回家去吧，看人家怎么笑话你。哟，你还真是个无敌海盗。哈克和我不是好哭的小娃娃。我们要留在这儿，对不对，哈克？他要走，就让他走好了。我看没有他，咱俩也照样可以过得好好的”

But Tom was uneasy, nevertheless, and was alarmed to see Joe go sullenly on with his dressing. And then it was discomforting to see Huck eyeing Joe's preparations so wistfully, and keeping up such an ominous silence. Presently, without a parting word, Joe began to wade off toward the Illinois shore. Tom's heart began to sink. He glanced at Huck. Huck could not bear the look, and dropped his eyes. Then he said:

话虽这么说，汤姆心里却不是个滋味，他看见乔闷闷不乐地只顾穿衣，不免有些慌乱。这时他又发现哈克眼睛眨也不眨地盯着乔，一言不发，满脸写着想和他一同回家的渴望，汤姆就更惴惴不安了。接着，乔连一个道别的字都没留下，就开始下水，向伊利诺斯州那边趟过去。汤姆的心开始往下沉。他瞟了一眼哈克，哈克受不了他这么一看，目光垂了下来。然后他说：

"I want to go, too, Tom. It was getting so lonesome anyway, and now it'll be worse. Let's us go, too, Tom."

“汤姆，我也想回家。这里越来越让人觉得孤单，只剩下咱们俩情况就更糟了。汤姆，咱们也走吧。”

"I won't!You can go, if you want to. I mean to stay."

“我坚决不走！你要是想走那就走吧。我是一定要留下来的。”

"Tom, I better go."

“汤姆，那我还是回去的好。”

"Well, go 'long — who's hendering you."

“好啊，去啊！你回去啊！谁拦你了？”

Huck began to pick up his scattered clothes. He said:

哈克开始把自己散落一地的衣服拾起来。他说：

"Tom, I wisht you'd come, too. Now you think it over. We'll wait for you when we get to shore."

“汤姆，我希望你也和我们一起走。你好好考虑一下吧。我们到岸边的时候会在那里等你。”

"Well, you'll wait a blame long time, that's all."

“哼，你们尽管走，在那儿慢慢等着吧，没什么好说的了。”

Huck started sorrowfully away, and Tom stood looking after him, with a strong desire tugging at his heart to yield his pride and go along too. He hoped the boys would stop, but they still waded slowly on. It suddenly dawned on Tom that it was become very lonely and still. He made one final struggle with his pride, and then darted after his comrades, yelling:

哈克伤心地走了。汤姆站在那里，望着他渐渐远去的背影，心中无比挣扎，恨不得马上抛下自尊跟上去。他希望那两个伙伴停下，可他们仍旧在慢慢趟着水向前走。汤姆忽然觉得自己落入了一个冷清而又寂寞的世界。在和自尊作了最后一次较量后，他终于直奔向两个伙伴，一边跑一边喊：

"Wait! Wait! I want to tell you something!"

“等一等！等一等！我有话要和你们说！”

They presently stopped and turned around. When he got to where they were, he began unfolding his secret, and they listened moodily till at last they saw the "point" he was driving at, and then they set up a war whoop of applause and said it was "splendid!" and said if he had told them at first, they wouldn't have started away. He made a plausible excuse; but his real reason had been the fear that not even the secret would keep them with him any very great length of time, and so he had meant to hold it in reserve as a last seduction.

他们立刻站住，转过身来。他一走到他们面前，就一点一点地道出了自己的秘密。他们不耐烦地听着，直到明白了他的“真正意图”，便兴奋地鼓起掌来，大声连呼“太妙了！”他们说要是一开始他就告诉他们，他们说什么都不会走的。他巧妙地搪塞了过去，其实当初他真正担心的是不知道这个秘密能把他们留在岛上多久，所以他下意识地守口如瓶，直到万不得已才亮出这张王牌。

The lads came gayly back and went at their sports again with a will, chattering all the time about Tom's stupendous plan and admiring the genius of it. After a dainty egg and fish dinner, Tom said he wanted to learn to smoke, now. Joe caught at the idea and said he would like to try, too. So Huck made pipes and filled them. These novices had never smoked anything before but cigars made of grapevine, and they "bit" the tongue, and were not considered manly anyway.

小家伙们又兴高采烈地回来了，他们满心欢喜地做着游戏，不停谈论着汤姆那伟大的计划，对他的天才构想佩服得五体投地。一顿龟蛋和鲜鱼组成的大餐之后，汤姆说他想学抽烟，就在现在。乔不但赞同，还说他也想试一试。于是，哈克就做了两个烟斗，装上烟叶。这两个外行之前只抽过葡萄藤做的雪茄。那种雪茄烟不仅抽着舌发麻，看起来也土气得要命。

Now they stretched themselves out on their elbows and began to puff, charily, and with slender confidence. The smoke had an unpleasant taste, and they gagged a little, but Tom said:

可这会儿，他们用胳膊肘支撑着身体，侧躺着开始吐出一个个烟圈，小心翼翼地，一看就知道没什么经验。烟的味道不怎么样，他们还时不时地呛得喘不过气，汤姆却说：

"Why, it's just as easy! If I'd a knowed this was all, I'd a learnt long ago."

“看，抽烟有什么难的！要不是我以前知道抽烟不过如此，肯定早就学会了。”

"So would I," said Joe. "It's just nothing."

“我也是，”乔说，“这根本不值一提嘛。”

"Why, many a time I've looked at people smoking, and thought well I wish I could do that; but I never thought I could," said Tom.

汤姆说：“哎，我以前总是看着别人抽烟，想我要会抽就好了；可从没想过自己真的会抽上。”

"That's just the way with me, hain't it, Huck? You've heard me talk just that way — haven't you, Huck? I'll leave it to Huck if I haven't."

“哈克，我也是这样的，对不对？”乔说，“你也听我这样说过的，对不对，哈克？要是假话，我任听你摆布。”

"Yes — heaps of times," said Huck.

“是的，他说过——说过好几次。”哈克说

"Well, I have too," said Tom; "oh, hundreds of times. Once down by the slaughterhouse. Don't you remember, Huck? Bob Tanner was there, and Johnny Miller, and Jeff Thatcher, when I said it. Don't you remember, Huck, 'bout me saying that?"

“嘿，我也说过呀，”汤姆说，“唔，都该有几百次了。有一回是在屠宰场。你不记得了，哈克？鲍勃·唐纳当时也在场，约翰尼·米勒、杰夫·撒切尔也都在。现在总该想起来了吧，哈克？”

"Yes, that's so," said Huck. "That was the day after I lost a white alley. No, 'twas the day before."

“想起来了，是有这么回事，”哈克说，“那正是我丢掉白石头弹子的后一天。不对，是前一天。”

"There — I told you so," said Tom. "Huck recollects it."

“瞧——我说了吧，”汤姆说。“哈克想起来了。”

"I bleeve I could smoke this pipe all day," said Joe. "I don't feel sick."

“我敢说让我抽一整天的烟都没问题，”乔说，“我不觉得恶心。”

"Neither do I," said Tom. "I could smoke it all day. "I could smoke it all day. But I bet you Jeff Thatcher couldn't."

“我也不觉得恶心，”汤姆说，“我也能成天地抽这种烟。但我敢打赌杰夫·撒切尔就不行。”

"Jeff Thatcher! Why, he'd keel over just with two draws. Just let him try it once. He'd see!"

“杰夫·撒切尔！嘿，他抽上个一两口就该晕倒了。不信让他试试。一口就会把他呛个半死！”

"I bet he would. And Johnny Miller — I wish I could see Johnny Miller tackle it once."

“我敢打赌他还真是够呛。还有约翰尼·米勒——我倒很想看他来上几口。”

"Oh, don't I!" said Joe. "Why, I bet you Johnny Miller couldn't any more do this than nothing. Just one little snifter would fetch him."

“啊，我看算了吧！”乔说。“嘿，约翰尼·米勒可不是这块料。他只要闻一下这味儿小命就没了。”

" 'Deed it would, Joe. Say — I wish the boys could see us now."

“的确如此，乔。哎——我真希望那些小子能看到我们现在的样子。”

"So do I."

“我也是。”

"Say — boys, don't say anything about it, and some time when they're around, I'll come up to you and say 'Joe, got a pipe? I want a smoke.' And you'll say, kind of careless like, as if it warn't anything, you'll say, 'Yes, I got my old pipe, and another one, but my tobacker ain't very good.' And I'll say, 'Oh, that's all right, if it's strong enough.' And then you'll out with the pipes, and we'll light up just as ca'm, and then just see 'em look!"

“哎——伙计们，先把这事告诉他们，以后有机会的时候，趁他们在场，我就过来问：‘乔，带烟斗了吗？我想抽两口。’你就摆出一副无所谓的样子，就像这根本不算回事，你说：‘带了，就我那支老烟斗，喏，这还有一支，不过我的烟叶不太好抽喔。’然后我就说：‘哦，没关系，够冲就行。’然后你就掏出烟斗，咱俩不紧不慢地点上火，让他们瞧个够。”

"By jings, that'll be gay, Tom! I wish it was now!"

“呃，那一定很有趣，汤姆！我恨不得现在就表演给他们看看！”

"So do I! And when we tell 'em we learned when we was off pirating, won't they wish they'd been along?"

“我也这么想！我还要告诉他们，我们是在外当海盗时学会的，他们一准后悔当初没有和我们一块儿来！”

"Oh, I reckon not! I'll just bet they will!"

“嗯，那是当然咯！我敢打赌他们准悔死了！”

So the talk ran on. But presently it began to flag a trifle, and grow disjointed. The silences widened; the expectoration marvelously increased. Every pore inside the boys' cheeks became a spouting fountain; they could scarcely bail out the cellars under their tongues fast enough to prevent an inundation; little overflowings down their throats occurred in spite of all they could do, and sudden retchings followed every time. Both boys were looking very pale and miserable, now. Joe's pipe dropped from his nerveless fingers. Tom's followed. Both fountains were going furiously and both pumps bailing with might and main. Joe said feebly:

谈话就这样进行下去。但不一会儿他们就泄气了，各自胡言乱语起来。再后来几个人干脆沉默下来了。汤姆和乔开始吐痰，而且越吐越厉害。这两个孩子的腮帮子现在变成了两座欢快的喷泉；舌头底下像是藏了积满水的地窖，为了缓解水灾，得赶忙往外排水；但无论他们怎么尽力吐水，嗓子里还是有水源源不断地涌上来，连带着一阵阵恶心。此刻，两个孩子已经脸色煞白，一副惨相。乔的手指已经没了知觉，烟斗从手里掉了下来。汤姆的跟着也掉了。两座喷泉尽情地喷着水，两台抽水机也全力以赴地向外抽水。乔有气无力地说：

"I've lost my knife. I reckon I better go and find it."

“我的小刀不见了。我想我得回去去找找看。”

Tom said, with quivering lips and halting utterance:

汤姆嘴唇发抖，断断续续地说：

"I'll help you. You go over that way and I'll hunt around by the spring. No, you needn't come, Huck — we can find it."

“我来帮你找。你往那边去找，我在泉水周围看看。不，哈克，不用你来帮忙——我俩能找到。”

So Huck sat down again, and waited an hour. Then he found it lonesome, and went to find his comrades. They were wide apart in the woods, both very pale, both fast asleep. But something informed him that if they had had any trouble they had got rid of it.

于是哈克重新坐下来，等着他们回来。一个小时后，他觉得有些无聊，便起去找同伴。他俩东躺一个西躺一个，都脸色苍白，在林中睡得正香。哈克看得出他们俩抽烟不太适应，不过现在这种难受已经过去了。

They were not talkative at supper that night. They had a humble look, and when Huck prepared his pipe after the meal and was going to prepare theirs, they said no, they were not feeling very well — something they ate at dinner had disagreed with them.

吃饭时，大家的话都不多。乔和汤姆看上去可怜巴巴的。饭后，哈克准备好自己烟斗，正打算也给他们准备，他俩说不用了，因为晚饭吃的东西有点不大对劲，他们觉得有些不舒服。

About midnight Joe awoke, and called the boys. There was a brooding oppressiveness in the air that seemed to bode something. The boys huddled themselves together and sought the friendly companionship of the fire, though the dull dead heat of the breathless atmosphere was stifling. They sat still, intent and waiting. The solemn hush continued. Beyond the light of the fire everything was swallowed up in the blackness of darkness. Presently there came a quivering glow that vaguely revealed the foliage for a moment and then vanished. By and by another came, a little stronger. Then another. Then a faint moan came sighing through the branches of the forest and the boys felt a fleeting breath upon their cheeks, and shuddered with the fancy that the Spirit of the Night had gone by. There was a pause. Now a weird flash turned night into day and showed every little grass blade, separate and distinct, that grew about their feet. And it showed three white, startled faces, too. A deep peal of thunder went rolling and tumbling down the heavens and lost itself in sullen rumblings in the distance. A sweep of chilly air passed by, rustling all the leaves and snowing the flaky ashes broadcast about the fire. Another fierce glare lit up the forest and an instant crash followed that seemed to rend the treetops right over the boys' heads. They clung together in terror, in the thick gloom that followed.A few big raindrops fell pattering upon the leaves.

半夜的时候，乔醒了，叫醒另外两个孩子。空气闷热逼人，像是要变天了。尽管空气又闷又热，令人窒息，几个孩子还是紧紧依偎在一起，尽量靠近火堆。他们全神贯注地坐在那里，默默地等待着。周围还是一片寂静。除了闪烁的火光，一切都被漆黑的夜色吞没了。不一会儿，一道亮光滑过颤动的树叶，闪了一下又消失了。不久，又是一道亮光，这次光线更强了。接着又一道。就在这时候，一阵低吼从树丛中传来，几个孩子仿佛觉得有一股气息拂过脸颊，还以为是幽灵飘过去了，吓得瑟瑟发抖。片刻的安静过后，又是一道悚目的闪光，把黑夜照得亮如白昼，就连脚下的草叶也像刀片一般历历可辨；同时，三张惨白的脸上，惊恐毕露无遗。一阵沉雷轰轰隆隆从高空滚来，又渐去渐远，逐渐消失在遥远的天边。一阵冷风袭来，树叶沙沙作响；风把火堆里的灰高高卷起，让它们雪花似地飞撒下来。又一道强光照亮了树林，响雷紧随其后，仿佛要将孩子们头顶上的树梢劈裂。之后，又是一团漆黑，一片沉寂。几个孩子吓得抱成一团，一阵大雨点重重地砸在树叶上。

"Quick! boys, go for the tent!" exclaimed Tom.

“快，伙计们！快撤到帐篷里去！”汤姆大喊。

They sprang away, stumbling over roots and among vines in the dark, no two plunging in the same direction. A furious blast roared through the trees, making everything sing as it went. One blinding flash after another came, and peal on peal of deafening thunder. And now a drenching rain poured down and the rising hurricane drove it in sheets along the ground. The boys cried out to each other, but the roaring wind and the booming thunderblasts drowned their voices utterly. However, one by one they straggled in at last and took shelter under the tent, cold, scared, and streaming with water; but to have company in misery seemed something to be grateful for. They could not talk, the old sail flapped so furiously, even if the other noises would have allowed them. The tempest rose higher and higher, and presently the sail tore loose from its fastenings and went winging away on the blast. The boys seized each other's hands and fled, with many tumblings and bruises, to the shelter of a great oak that stood upon the riverbank. Now the battle was at its highest. Under the ceaseless conflagration of lightning that flamed in the skies, everything below stood out in clean-cut and shadowless distinctness: the bending trees, the billowy river, white with foam, the driving spray of spume flakes, the dim outlines of the high bluffs on the other side, glimpsed through the drifting cloud rack and the slanting veil of rain. Every little while some giant tree yielded the fight and fell crashing through the younger growth; and the unflagging thunderpeals came now in earsplitting explosive bursts, keen and sharp, and unspeakably appalling. The storm culminated in one matchless effort that seemed likely to tear the island to pieces, burn it up, drown it to the treetops, blow it away, and deafen every creature in it, all at one and the same moment. It was a wild night for homeless young heads to be out in.

他们拔腿就跑，在黑暗中不时地绊上树根和藤蔓。由于极度害怕，他们各自一头扎进了不同方向。一阵狂风呼啸而过，整个林子都簌簌作响。耀眼的闪电一道紧跟着一道，震耳的雷声轰隆不断。片刻之间，倾盆大雨劈头泼下，阵阵狂风扫过地面，把它们刮成一片片雨幕。孩子们相互呼喊，可是风吼雷啸，完全淹没了他们的声音。不过，他们还是一个接一个地冲回了露营地，躲在帐篷底下，又冷又怕，浑身湿透。不过在这样的逆境中，大家还能守在一块，就是不幸中的万幸了。他们没法说话。那块旧帆篷噼里啪啦响得太厉害，这么大的噪音里根本交谈不起来。狂风越刮越猛，暴雨也越下越大。风不久便吹松了系帆篷的绳子，把它一卷而飞。孩子们紧紧抓牢了对方的手，逃向河岸上一棵大橡树底下躲雨，一路上磕磕绊绊，碰破了许多地方。这时候，天空中风、雨、雷、电交加，仿佛一场战役进入了最高潮。天空被闪电点燃了，天宇下的万物被光亮映衬得分明；树木都弯下了腰、大河里白浪翻滚、大片大片的泡沫随风起舞，还有河对岸高耸的悬崖峭壁的模糊轮廓，都在那飘摇的乱云和斜倾的雨幕中时隐时现。每隔一会，就有一棵大树败下阵来，哗啦一声扑倒在小树丛里。雷鸣震耳欲聋，像在天空中炸开了锅，恐怖至极，难以言表。最后一阵暴风雨席卷而来，威力更是无与伦比，似乎要在一瞬间把小岛撕成碎片，烧成灰烬，淹没树顶，再把它吹到十万八千里的天边，把岛上的生灵都震昏震聋。对这几个离家出走的孩子们来说，这一夜实在够他们受的了。

But at last the battle was done, and the forces retired with weaker and weaker threatenings and grumblings, and peace resumed her sway. The boys went back to camp, a good deal awed; but they found there was still something to be thankful for, because the great sycamore, the shelter of their beds, was a ruin, now, blasted by the lightnings, and they were not under it when the catastrophe happened.

但是，暴风雨最后总算过去了。狂风与暴雨一起，渐渐平息下来，一切又恢复了宁静。孩子们回到宿营地时，早已给吓了个半死。营地一片狼藉，总为他们提供绿阴的那棵梧桐树已经被雷劈倒，而幸运的是雷击之时，他们恰巧不在树下。

Everything in camp was drenched, the campfire as well; for they were but heedless lads, like their generation, and had made no provision against rain. Here was matter for dismay, for they were soaked through and chilled. They were eloquent in their distress; but they presently discovered that the fire had eaten so far up under the great log it had been built against (where it curved upward and separated itself from the ground), that a handbreadth or so of it had escaped wetting; so they patiently wrought until, with shreds and bark gathered from the under sides of sheltered logs, they coaxed the fire to burn again. Then they piled on great dead boughs till they had a roaring furnace, and were glad-hearted once more. They dried their boiled ham and had a feast, and after that they sat by the fire and expanded and glorified their midnight adventure until morning, for there was not a dry spot to sleep on anywhere around.

露营地的一切都被大雨淋了个湿透，篝火也给浇灭了。这几个孩子还是和同龄人一样，缺乏实际经验，没有想到要去防雨。更惨的是，他们都被淋成了落汤鸡，冷得受不了。那副狼狈相不言自喻。不过他们很快发现，之前的那堆火已经把他们靠着生火的那根倒在地上的大树干（在它翘起来的地方）烧得凹进去很深，因此还有块巴掌大的地方幸运地避开了雨水的侵袭。于是他们想方设法，从那些有遮掩的树下，好不容易找来些碎叶、树皮做火引子，总算又把火堆救活了。随后他们又添了许多枯树枝，直到火苗呼呼直蹿，这才又欢呼雀跃了起来。他们把熟火腿烘干，总算吃了顿好的。吃饱了就坐在火堆旁，把夜半的历险添油加醋地大肆渲染一番，一直聊到清早，因为四下没有一处能干地方能让人躺下睡觉的。

As the sun began to steal in upon the boys, drowsiness came over them and they went out on the sandbar and lay down to sleep. They got scorched out by and by, and drearily set about getting breakfast. After the meal they felt rusty, and stiff-jointed, and a little homesick once more. Tom saw the signs, and fell to cheering up the pirates as well as he could. But they cared nothing for marbles, or circus, or swimming, or anything. He reminded them of the imposing secret, and raised a ray of cheer. While it lasted, he got them interested in a new device. This was to knock off being pirates, for a while, and be Indians for a change. They were attracted by this idea;so it was not long before they were stripped, and striped from head to heel with black mud, like so many zebras — all of them chiefs, of course — and then they went tearing through the woods to attack an English settlement.

不知不觉中，太阳已经升起来了。温暖的阳光照在孩子们的身上，把他们弄得昏昏欲睡，最后他们干脆走出林子，躺在沙滩上睡起觉来。不久，阳光就变得毒辣起来。他们感到浑身燥热，就站起来懒洋洋地弄饭吃。吃罢，他们都觉得浑身酸痛，骨节僵硬，于是又有点想家了。汤姆看出了苗头，极力说着开心事，想叫两个小海盗赶快打起精神来。可是，他们对什么都提不起兴趣，石头弹子、马戏、游泳都不例外。他又向他们提起了那个秘密，这才让他们有点兴奋起来了。趁着这股劲儿，他又用新玩法激起了他们的兴趣，就是让大家暂时放弃当海盗，改扮成印第安人，换换口味。他们一下子就被这个主意吸引住了。于是，不久他们便脱得精光，从头到脚抹上了一道道的黑泥，像斑马一样——当然个个都是酋长——然后他们奔进丛林，去袭击一个英国佬的聚居点。

By and by they separated into three hostile tribes, and darted upon each other from ambush with dreadful war whoops, and killed and scalped each other by thousands. It was a gory day. Consequently it was an extremely satisfactory one.

后来他们又分成三个敌对的部落，各自从埋伏处发出可怕的吼叫，冲出来相互袭击，伤亡者数以千计。这是一场血淋淋的战争，因此也是个痛快淋漓的日子。

They assembled in camp toward supper time, hungry and happy, but now a difficulty arose — hostile Indians could not break the bread of hospitality together without first making peace, and this was a simple impossibility without smoking a pipe of peace. There was no other process that ever they had heard of. Two of the savages almost wished they had remained pirates. However, there was no other way; so with such show of cheerfulness as they could muster they called for the pipe and took their whiff as it passed, in due form.

临近吃晚饭时，他们才回到宿营地集合，虽然饿得很，却也开心地不得了；不过现在又一个难题产生了——互相仇视的印第安人如不事先讲和，就不能在一块友好进餐，而讲和的必要前提是抽一袋烟。除此之外，他们从没听说过其他什么讲和方法。这三个野蛮人中的两个几乎一致表示希望继续当海盗。大家终究想不出别的解决办法；所以他们只好装出一副愉快享受的样子，按照老方法，把烟斗要过来轮流抽了一口。

And behold, they were glad they had gone into savagery, for they had gained something; they found that they could now smoke a little without having to go and hunt for a lost knife; they did not get sick enough to be seriously uncomfortable. They were not likely to fool away this high promise for lack of effort. No, they practised cautiously, after supper, with right fair success, and so they spent a jubilant evening. They were prouder and happier in their new acquirement than they would have been in the scalping and skinning of the Six Nations. We will leave them to smoke and chatter and brag, since we have no further use for them at present.

看，他们这下又很高兴自己变回野蛮人了，因为实在有不小的好处：他们发现自己已经可以抽点烟，而不必去找丢失的小刀了；现在他们已经不再被烟呛得难受了。他们可不会轻易放过这可喜的进步，这种时候可绝不能偷懒，决不。吃过晚饭，他们又小心地练习了一下，相当成功，因此，整个晚上几个人都过得喜气洋洋。就算他们能把印第安人的六个部落通通剥掉头皮，甚至把全身的皮都剥掉，也不会比这更畅快。就随他们在那儿抽烟、喋喋不休和胡乱闲扯吧，反正我们目前每也什么事情要麻烦他们的了。





Chapter 17


第十七章

BUT there was no hilarity in the little town that same tranquil Saturday afternoon. The Harpers, and Aunt Polly's family, were being put into mourning, with great grief and many tears. An unusual quiet possessed the village, although it was ordinarily quiet enough, in all conscience. The villagers conducted their concerns with an absent air, and talked little; but they sighed often. The Saturday holiday seemed a burden to the children. They had no heart in their sports, and gradually gave them up.

可就是在这同一个星期六的下午，小镇上虽然宁静，人们的心情却无比凝重。哈帕一家和波莉姨妈家都沉浸在悲哀之中，伤心的哭声绵绵不断。说实话，这里本来就已经够宁静的了，而现在更是让异常的静谧包围了起来。村里的人干活时都漫不经心，也很少说话；不过大家都长吁短叹个不停。周六这个往常的假日似乎也成了孩子们的负担。他们没心思做游戏，便渐渐地放弃了这项活动。

In the afternoon Becky Thatcher found herself moping about the deserted schoolhouse yard, and feeling very melancholy. But she found nothing there to comfort her. She soliloquized:

那天下午，贝基·撒切尔在空无一人的学校操场上闲逛，心里觉得既凄凉又哀伤，也找不到什么东西来安慰自己。于是她喃喃自语道：

"Oh, if I only had a brass andiron knob again! But I haven't got anything now to remember him by." And she choked back a little sob.

“哎，我要是还能得到那只柴架上的铜把手就好了！现在我连一件纪念能他的东西都没有。”她哽咽着，强忍住泪水。

Presently she stopped, and said to herself:

过了一会，她停住脚步，自言自语道：

"It was right here. Oh, if it was to do over again, I wouldn't say that — I wouldn't say it for the whole world.But he's gone now; I'll never, never, never see him any more."

“就是在这儿。哦，如果他再给我一次的话，我决不会像上回那样顽固了，无论如何也不会再像上回那样说话了。可是他走了，我将永远、永远、永远都见不到他了。”

This thought broke her down and she wandered away, with the tears rolling down her cheeks.

想到这里，她再也支撑不住了。于是她木然地走开，任泪水顺着脸颊流下来。

Then quite a group of boys and girls — playmates of Tom's and Joe's — came by, and stood looking over the paling fence and talking in reverent tones of how Tom did so-and-so the last time they saw him, and how Joe said this and that small trifle (pregnant with awful prophecy, as they could easily see now!) — and each speaker pointed out the exact spot where the lost lads stood at the time, and then added something like "and I was a-standing just so — just as I am now, and as if you was him — I was as close as that — and he smiled, just this way — and then something seemed to go all over me, like — awful, you know — and I never thought what it meant, of course, but I can see now!"

后来，有一大群男孩和女孩——汤姆和乔曾经的玩伴们——走了过来，站在那里望向栅栏那边，用虔诚的语调回忆着汤姆曾经如何干过什么事情，以及他们最后一次见到汤姆的情形。还有乔怎样说了这样和那样的小事情（现在他们不难看出，这一切都充满了多么可怕的预兆啊！）——在场的每个人都指着失踪的伙伴当时所站的确切地点，然后又补上一句：“我当时，嗯就在这儿站着——就像现在这样，比如你是他——我俩就离这么近——他还笑了起来，就像这样——接着我就觉得浑身不对劲，就像——特别吓人，你知道的——我当时根本不明白是怎么回事，可现在我全明白了。”

Then there was a dispute about who saw the dead boys last in life, and many claimed that dismal distinction, and offered evidences, more or less tampered with by the witness; and when it was ultimately decided who did see the departed last, and exchanged the last words with them, the lucky parties took upon themselves a sort of sacred importance, and were gaped at and envied by all the rest. One poor chap, who had no other grandeur to offer, said with tolerably manifest pride in the remembrance:

接着他们就谁最后看见那些失踪的同伴展开了一场争论。许多孩子虽然为朋友伤心难过，却还是争着抢头功，并且提出了一些证据，被证人添油加醋地说了一番。最后公布结果时，那些被认定是最后看到过死者并和他们交谈过的幸运者便摆出一副了不起而又神圣庄严的样子，其余的人则张着嘴望着他们，羡慕得不得了。有个可怜的家伙，他没有什么值得荣耀的事情可谈，于是就想起一件往事，便用宽容大肚，不予追究的口吻说道：

"Well, Tom Sawyer he licked me once."

“哦，汤姆·索亚揍过我一回。”

But that bid for glory was a failure. Most of the boys could say that, and so that cheapened the distinction too much. The group loitered away, still recalling memories of the lost heroes, in awed voices.

可是，这个想引起大家注意的理由失败了，因为大多数孩子都可以这么说，所以他的这句话就不大值钱了。后来这群孩子继续用敬畏的口气追述几位死去的英雄的生平事迹，时间在对话中不知不觉地就溜走了。

When the Sunday-school hour was finished, the next morning, the bell began to toll, instead of ringing in the usual way. It was a very still Sabbath, and the mournful sound seemed in keeping with the musing hush that lay upon nature. The villagers began to gather, loitering a moment in the vestibule to converse in whispers about the sad event. But there was no whispering in the house; only the funereal rustling of dresses as the women gathered to their seats, disturbed the silence there. None could remember when the little church had been so full before. There was finally a waiting pause, an expectant dumbness, and then Aunt Polly entered, followed by Sid and Mary, and they by the Harper family, all in deep black, and the whole congregation, the old minister as well, rose reverently and stood until the mourners were seated in the front pew. There was another communing silence, broken at intervals by muffled sobs, and then the minister spread his hands abroad and prayed. A moving hymn was sung, and the text followed: "I am the Resurrection and the Life."

第二天上午，主日学校下课以后，教堂的大钟一反往日的样子，发出了报丧的钟声。这个星期天，镇上一片宁静，报丧的钟声似乎与笼罩着大地的沉寂很是协调。村民们开始聚集在一起，在走廊里逗留了一小会儿，低声谈论着这件惨案。可是教堂里却一片安静，没有人窃窃私语，只有在女人们入座时裙子沙沙的摩擦声暂时地打破了这凝重的氛围。谁也记不起这个小小的教堂上一次这样座无虚席是在什么时候了。后来教堂里又鸦雀无声了，大家静心等候了一阵才见波莉姨妈走了进来，后面跟着希德和玛丽，还有哈帕一家，他们都穿着深黑色的丧服。这时全场起立，连年迈的牧师也不例外。大家恭恭敬敬地站着，一直等到刚进来的送葬家属在前排就座后才又坐下来。接着又是一阵默哀，时不时地夹杂着一阵阵哽噎的抽泣声。然后牧师摊开双手，做了祷告。人们唱了一首极为感人的圣歌，之后又念了一段颂词：“我是生命，复活是我。”

As the service proceeded, the clergyman drew such pictures of the graces, the winning ways, and the rare promise of the lost lads that every soul there, thinking he recognized these pictures, felt a pang in remembering that he had persistently blinded himself to them, always before, and had as persistently seen only faults and flaws in the poor boys. The minister related many a touching incident in the lives of the departed, too, which illustrated their sweet, generous natures, and the people could easily see, now, how noble and beautiful those episodes were, and remembered with grief that at the time they occurred they had seemed rank rascalities, well deserving of the cowhide. The congregation became more and more moved, as the pathetic tale went on, till at last the whole company broke down and joined the weeping mourners in a chorus of anguished sobs, the preacher himself giving way to his feelings, and crying in the pulpit.

丧礼继续进行，牧师描述了死者的美德和他们讨喜的行为举止，以及非凡的前途。在座的人都想起往日的画面，暗自承认他说得对，自己以前真是有眼无珠，居然对这些视而不见，反倒死盯着这些可怜孩子的过错和毛病不放，心情又沉重了几分。牧师还讲述了这几个孩子在世时的一些感人事迹，他们的天真可爱，慷慨大方又一次展现在大家眼前。人们现在一眼就看出他们那时的行为是多么的高尚，令人赞美。然而当时这一切却被认为是彻头彻尾的流氓行为，大家甚至恨不得用鞭子抽这些孩子。想到这一切，人们更难过了。牧师越说越动情，在场的人也越听越受感动，到最后所有人都沉痛地呜咽起来。牧师本人也控制不住自己的感情在布道台上哭起来。

There was a rustle in the gallery, which nobody noticed; a moment later the church door creaked; the minister raised his streaming eyes above his handkerchief, and stood transfixed! First one and then another pair of eyes followed the minister's, and then almost with one impulse the congregation rose and stared while the three dead boys came marching up the aisle, Tom in the lead, Joe next, and Huck, a ruin of drooping rags, sneaking sheepishly in the rear! They had been hid in the unused gallery listening to their own funeral sermon!

教堂的长廊里响起一阵沙沙声，可是没有人注意到。没过一会儿，教堂的门嘎吱一声开了，牧师拿开手绢，抬起泪汪汪的眼睛，站在那里呆住了！于是一双又一双的眼睛顺着牧师的视线看过去，接着全体哀悼者几乎同时都站了起来，睁大眼睛看着死而复生的这三个孩子沿着过道大踏步走来。走在最前面的是汤姆，乔在中间，哈克拖着破烂的衣衫，偷偷走在最后。他们刚才一直躲在那没人的长廊里，倾听着追悼自己的颂词哩！

Aunt Polly, Mary, and the Harpers threw themselves upon their restored ones, smothered them with kisses and poured out thanksgivings, while poor Huck stood abashed and uncomfortable, not knowing exactly what to do or where to hide from so many unwelcoming eyes. He wavered, and started to slink away, but Tom seized him and said:

波莉姨姨、玛丽，还有哈帕一家一下子向这几个失而复得的孩子扑过去，把他们吻得透不过气来，同时不断地感谢上天。这个时候可怜的哈克却站在那里，窘迫不安，不知道该如何是好，也不知道逃到哪里才能躲开这些不欢迎自己的目光。他犹豫了一下，正打算溜走，可是汤姆一把抓住他，说道：

"Aunt Polly, it ain't fair. Somebody's got to be glad to see Huck."

“波莉姨妈，这不公平，哈克也该受大家欢迎才对。”

"And so they shall. I'm glad to see him, poor motherless thing!" And the loving attentions Aunt Polly lavished upon him were the one thing capable of making him more uncomfortable than he was before.

“是的，说得有道理，我就很欢迎他。这个失去了妈妈的可怜的小东西！”波莉姨妈的突袭而来亲切关怀，反倒使哈克更不自在了。

Suddenly the minister shouted at the top of his voice: "Praise God from whom all blessings flow — SING!— and put your hearts in it!"

忽然牧师放开嗓音，高唱起来：“赞美上帝，保佑众生——唱！——大家尽情地唱呀！”

And they did. Old Hundred swelled up with a triumphant burst, and while it shook the rafters Tom Sawyer the Pirate looked around upon the envying juveniles about him and confessed in his heart that this was the proudest moment of his life.

大家积极响应，热情地唱了起来。高昂的歌声回荡在教堂上空，海盗汤姆·索亚向四周张望，发现周围的伙伴们都在羡慕他，自己也心中暗自承认，这是他平生最得意的时刻。

As the "sold" congregation trooped out they said they would almost be willing to be made ridiculous again to hear Old Hundred sung like that once more.

当那些“受骗”参加葬礼的人成群结队地走出教堂时，大家都说要是还能像今天这样热情地唱颂歌，哪怕再被捉弄一次也心甘情愿。

Tom got more cuffs and kisses that day — according to Aunt Polly's varying moods — than he had earned before in a year; and he hardly knew which expressed the most gratefulness to God and affection for himself.

那一天，汤姆不是挨耳光就是被亲吻，全由波莉姨妈的心情变化说了算。就算把从前一年所受的加起来也没有今天一天的多。他简直搞不清哪一种是表示对上帝的感激，哪一种是对他的爱。





Chapter 18


第十八章

THAT was Tom's great secret — the scheme to return home with his brother pirates and attend their own funerals. They had paddled over to the Missouri shore on a log, at dusk on Saturday, landing five or six miles below the village; they had slept in the woods at the edge of the town till nearly daylight, and had then crept through back lanes and alleys and finished their sleep in the gallery of the church among a chaos of invalided benches.

这就是汤姆伟大的秘密计划——和他的海盗帮兄弟们一起回家，出席自己的葬礼。星期六的黄昏，他们坐着一块大木头顺流而漂，来到了密苏里河河岸，在离小镇下游五六英里的地方上了岸，到镇外的树林子里一觉睡到快天亮。然后他们蹑手蹑脚地穿过教堂后面的胡同和小巷，在教堂长廊乱七八糟的破凳子中间，又接着睡了一大觉。

At breakfast, Monday morning, Aunt Polly and Mary were very loving to Tom, and very attentive to his wants. There was an unusual amount of talk. In the course of it Aunt Polly said:

星期一早晨吃早饭的时候，波莉姨妈和玛丽对汤姆非常亲切，他要什么都满足他。大家的话也比平常多得多。谈话中，波莉姨妈说：

"Well, I don't say it wasn't a fine joke, Tom, to keep everybody suffering 'most a week so you boys had a good time, but it is a pity you could be so hardhearted as to let me suffer so. If you could come over on a log to go to your funeral, you could have come over and give me a hint some way that you warn't dead, but only run off."

“喂，汤姆，要我说你这个玩笑开得太好了，你们几个男孩子为了开开心却让我们大家受了几乎一个星期的罪。可我难过的是，你居然这么狠心，让我也跟着吃这么多苦头。你既然能够坐在大木头上来参加自己的葬礼，那你为什么就不能给我点暗示之类的，说明你并没有死掉，只是出走罢了呢？”

"Yes, you could have done that, Tom," said Mary; "and I believe you would if you had thought of it."

“是呀，汤姆，你完全可以那样做啊，”玛丽接着说，“我想你要是想到这一点，你一定会那样做的。”

"Would you, Tom?" said Aunt Polly, her face lighting wistfully. "Say, now, would you, if you'd thought of it?"

“你会的吧？”波莉姨妈问，脸上一副惆怅的神情。“你说呀，要是你想到了，你会不会那样做呢？”

"I — well, I don't know. Twould a spoiled everything."

“我——呃，我说不准。那有可能把所有事情都搞砸。”

"Tom, I hoped you loved me that much," said Aunt Polly, with a grieved tone that discomforted the boy. "It would have been something if you'd cared enough to think of it, even if you didn't do it."

“汤姆，我原来以为你非常爱我的。”波莉姨妈说，悲伤的语调使汤姆很不安。“哪怕你能想到这一点，就算不这样做，对我也很重要啊。”

"Now auntie, that ain't any harm," pleaded Mary; "it's only Tom's giddy way — he is always in such a rush that he never thinks of anything."

“哦，姨妈，那没什么关系，”玛丽帮着汤姆解释，“汤姆就是这样子，毛手毛脚的——做事总是这么匆匆忙忙，从不考虑什么后果。”

"More's the pity. Sid would have thought. And Sid would have come and done it, too. Tom, you'll look back, some day, when it's too late, and wish you'd cared a little more for me when it would have cost you so little."

“那更让人伤心。要是换了希德就会想到的。他会来告诉我的。”汤姆，有朝一日当你回想往事的时候，一切就都晚了，你会后悔当初这样不在乎我的感受，尽管那都是些力所能及的小事。”

"Now auntie, you know I do care for you," said Tom.

“噢，姨妈，你要相信我真的爱你啊。”汤姆说。

"I'd know it better if you acted more like it."

“你要是能这样做的话，我就更相信你了。”

"I wish now I'd thought," said Tom, with a repentant tone; "but I dreamt about you, anyway. That's something, ain't it?"

“我现在真心希望我当时能想到啊，”汤姆不无懊悔地说，“不过我曾经梦见过你，不管怎么说。那也说明了我很爱你啊，不是么？”

"It ain't much — a cat does that much — but it's better than nothing. What did you dream?"

“那说明不了什么——猫也能做到那个——不过这总比连梦都没梦见强。你梦见我什么了？”

"Why, Wednesday night I dreamt that you was sitting over there by the bed, and Sid was sitting by the woodbox, and Mary next to him."

“噢，星期三夜里，我梦见你坐在那个床边上，希德靠木箱坐着，玛丽坐在他旁边。”

"Well, so we did. So we always do. I'm glad your dreams could take even that much trouble about us."

“好吧，我们确实是那样的。我们经常那样坐。我真高兴你梦里还能这样为我们操心。”

"And I dreamt that Joe Harper's mother was here."

“我还梦见乔·哈帕的妈妈也在这里。”

"Why, she was here! Did you dream any more?"

“哎呀，她是来过。你还梦见了什么？”

"Oh, lots. But it's so dim, now."

“噢，很多。不过现在都想不太起来了。”

"Well, try to recollect — can't you?"

“那么，尽量回想一下行不行？”

"Somehow it seems to me that the wind — the wind blowed the — the —"

“我记得好像风——风吹灭了——吹灭了——”

"Try harder, Tom! The wind did blow something. Come!"

“好好想想，汤姆！风确实吹灭了什么。快说啊！”

Tom pressed his fingers on his forehead an anxious minute, and then said:

汤姆把手指放在额头上，很着急地想了一会，然后说：

"I've got it now! I've got it now! It blowed the candle!"

“我想起来了！想起来了！风吹灭了蜡烛！”

"Mercy on us! Go on, Tom — go on!"

“我的天啊！接着说，汤姆——再接着说！”

"And it seems to me that you said, 'Why, I believe that that door —'"

“我记得好像你说了，‘嘿，我想那门——’”

"Go on, Tom!"

“往下说，汤姆！”

"Just let me study a moment — just a moment. Oh, yes — you said you believed the door was open."

“让我稍微回想一下——等一会。噢，对了——你说你想那门是开着的。”

"As I'm sitting here, I did! Didn't I, Mary! Go on!"

“我当时就像现在这样坐在这儿，我确实说过！是不是，玛丽！继续说！”

"And then — and then — well I won't be certain, but it seems like as if you made Sid go and — and —"

“后来——后来——我不太确定，不过我仿佛记得你让希德去——去——”

"Well?Well? What did I make him do, Tom? What did I make him do?"

“去哪了？我让他去干什么了，汤姆？我让他去干什么了？”

"You made him — you — Oh, you made him shut it."

“你让他——你——噢，你让他去关上门。”

"Well, for the land's sake! I never heard the beat of that in all my days! Don't tell me there ain't anything in dreams, any more. Sereny Harper shall know of this before I'm an hour older. I'd like to see her get around this with her rubbage 'bout superstition. Go on, Tom!"

“啊，我的天哪！我这辈子都没听说过这样的事！谁也别再和我说梦全都是假的了。我这就去跟赛伦尼·哈帕讲，一个小时也不能等。她一向不相信迷信，这回看她还有什么可说的。再接着往下说，汤姆！”

"Oh, it's all getting just as bright as day, now. Next you said I warn't bad, only mischeevous and harum-scarum, and not any more responsible than — than — I think it was a colt, or something."

“噢，现在我记得一清二楚了。后来，你说我不坏，不过是有点淘气，冒冒失失的，不过就是个——我记得你说毛头小子之类的。”

"And so it was! Well, goodness gracious! Go on, Tom!"

“就是这样！哦，天哪！接着讲，汤姆！”

"And then you began to cry."

“然后你就哭了。”

"So I did. So I did. Not the first time, neither. And then —"

“我是哭了。我哭了，不是一次两次了。后来呢？”

"Then Mrs.Harper she began to cry, and said Joe was just the same, and she wished she hadn't whipped him for taking cream when she'd throwed it out her own self —"

“后来哈帕夫人也哭了起来。她说乔也是和我一样的孩子，她后悔不该为了他偷吃奶油的事用鞭子抽打他，其实是她自己把奶油扔掉了——”

"Tom! The spirit was upon you! You was a-prophesying — that's what you was doing! Land alive, go on, Tom!"

“你真神了！你简直是在预言——你就是在预言！天啊，继续讲，汤姆！”

"Then Sid he said — he said —"

“后来希德他说——他说……”

"I don't think I said anything," said Sid.

“我不记得我当时说了什么。”希德说。

"Yes you did, Sid," said Mary.

“不，希德，你说了。”玛丽说。

"Shut your heads and let Tom go on! What did he say, Tom?"

“你俩住嘴，让汤姆往下说！他说什么了，汤姆？”

"He said — I think he said he hoped I was better off where I was gone to, but if I'd been better sometimes —"

“他说——我记得他说他希望我在那个地方过得比较好，不过如果我从前表现得更好些——”

"There, d'you hear that! It was his very words!"

“看，你们听见了吧？他当时正是这么说的！”

"And you shut him up sharp."

“还有，你让他闭嘴。”

"I lay I did! There must a been an angel there. There was an angel there, somewheres!"

“我确实这样讲了！这事一定有神灵在帮你的忙。一定有个神灵在暗地里帮你的忙！”

"And Mrs. Harper told about Joe scaring her with a firecracker, and you told about Peter and the Painkiller —"

“哈帕夫人还讲了乔放爆竹吓着她的事，你就讲了彼得和止痛药……”

"Just as true as I live!"

“真是和我当时做的完全一样！”

"And then there was a whole lot of talk 'bout dragging the river for us, and 'bout having the funeral Sunday, and then you and old Miss Harper hugged and cried, and she went."

“后来你们还讲了到河里打捞我们，讲了星期日举行丧礼，后来你和哈帕夫人抱在一起哭了一场，最后她离开了。”

"It happened just so! It happened just so, as sure as I'm a-sitting in these very tracks. Tom, you couldn't told it more like, if you'd a-seen it! And then what? Go on, Tom!"

“事情经过确实如此！确实如此，就像我现在坐在这里一样。汤姆，就算你亲眼见过，说的也不过如此了！那么后来呢？继续说，汤姆！”

"Then I thought you prayed for me — and I could see you and hear every word you said. And you went to bed, and I was so sorry, that I took and wrote on a piece of sycamore bark, 'We ain't dead — we are only off being pirates,' and put it on the table by the candle; and then you looked so good, laying there asleep, that I thought I went and leaned over and kissed you on the lips."

“我记得后来你为我做了祈祷——我能看见，还能听见你所说的每个字。你上床睡觉了，我感到非常难过，于是拿出一块梧桐树皮，在上面写道：‘我们没有死，只是去当海盗了。’还把它放在桌子上的蜡烛旁边；后来你躺在那儿睡着了，看上去睡得那么香，于是我就走过去，弯下腰来，吻了你的嘴唇。”

"Did you, Tom, did you! I just forgive you everything for that!" And she seized the boy in a crushing embrace that made him feel like the guiltiest of villains.

“是吗，汤姆，是吗！为了这一点，我会原谅你一切过错的！”于是她给了这个小家伙一个紧紧的拥抱，这一抱反而使他感到自己就像一个罪恶深重的小混蛋。

"It was very kind, even though it was only a — dream," Sid soliloquized just audibly.

“这真是太好了，虽然它只是个梦罢了，”希德自言自语，声音小得刚好能听见。

"Shut up, Sid! A body does just the same in a dream as he'd do if he was awake. Here's a big Milum apple I've been saving for you, Tom, if you was ever found again — now go 'long to school.

“闭上嘴，希德！一个人梦有所思，日有所为。这个大苹果是我特意为你留的，汤姆，当时想如果要是能找到你的话——现在去上学吧。

I'm thankful to the good God and Father of us all I've got you back, that's long-suffering and merciful to them that believe on Him and keep His word, though goodness knows I'm unworthy of it, but if only the worthy ones got His blessings and had His hand to help them over the rough places, there's few enough would smile here or ever enter into His rest when the long night comes. Go 'long Sid, Mary, Tom — take yourselves off — you've hendered me long enough."

感谢我们仁慈的圣父，终于让你回来了。凡是相信主，听主的话的人，虽然历尽困苦，主一定会对他们大发慈悲，虽然天知道我是不配的。不过要是只有配受他爱护的人才能得到他的保佑，由他帮助渡过灾难，那就没有几个人能微笑的生活，或是死后到主那里去安息了。走吧，希德、玛丽，还有汤姆——快走吧——你们已经耽误了我够多时间的了。”

The children left for school, and the old lady to call on Mrs. Harper and vanquish her realism with Tom's marvelous dream. Sid had better judgment than to utter the thought that was in his mind as he left the house. It was this: "Pretty thin — as long a dream as that, without any mistakes in it!"

孩子们上学去了，老太太就去找哈帕太太，想用汤姆那个神奇的梦来打消哈帕太太那些现实的想法。希德离开家的时候，对汤姆的话心中已有了数，但决定不说出来。那就是：“这不可信——那么长的一个梦，居然没有一点差错！”

What a hero Tom was become, now! He did not go skipping and prancing, but moved with a dignified swagger as became a pirate who felt that the public eye was on him. And indeed it was; he tried not to seem to see the looks or hear the remarks as he passed along, but they were food and drink to him. Smaller boys than himself flocked at his heels, as proud to be seen with him, and tolerated by him, as if he had been the drummer at the head of a procession or the elephant leading a menagerie into town. Boys of his own size pretended not to know he had been away at all; but they were consuming with envy, nevertheless. They would have given anything to have that swarthy suntanned skin of his, and his glittering notoriety; and Tom would not have parted with either for a circus.

汤姆现在可成英雄了。他不再蹦蹦跳跳的，走路趾高气扬，俨然一个受人注目的海盗的样子。是的，他从人群中走过时，既不看他们一眼，也不理睬他们说什么，把他们当成大白菜一样。比汤姆小一些的孩子们成群结队跟在他身后，非常自豪自己能和汤姆在一起。汤姆也允许他们跟着，仿佛自己成了队伍行进中领头的鼓手或是进城表演的马戏团中领头的大象。与他同龄的伙伴们表面上装着根本不知道他曾走失过那回事，不过心里却忌妒得要命。只要能有汤姆小麦色的皮肤，或者是他响亮的名头，他们什么都愿意做，但汤姆一样也不愿让给他们，哪怕是拿马戏团来换。

At school the children made so much of him and of Joe, and delivered such eloquent admiration from their eyes, that the two heroes were not long in becoming insufferably "stuck-up." They began to tell their adventures to hungry listeners — but they only began; it was not a thing likely to have an end, with imaginations like theirs to furnish material. And finally, when they got out their pipes and went serenely puffing around, the very summit of glory was reached.

在学校里孩子们把汤姆和乔捧上了天，用崇拜的眼光看着他们。他俩开始向那些如饥似渴的“听众”讲他们的冒险。可故事只要一开头，就结束不了了，因为以他俩的想象力，只会添油加醋，越讲越长。到后来，他们拿出烟斗，不急不忙地抽着烟到处转，神气到登峰造极的地步。

Tom decided that he could be independent of Becky Thatcher now. Glory was sufficient. He would live for glory. Now that he was distinguished, maybe she would be wanting to "make up." Well, let her — she should see that he could be as indifferent as some other people. Presently she arrived. Tom pretended not to see her. He moved away and joined a group of boys and girls and began to talk. Soon he observed that she was tripping gayly back and forth with flushed face and dancing eyes, pretending to be busy chasing schoolmates, and screaming with laughter when she made a capture; but he noticed that she always made her capture in his vicinity, and that she seemed to cast a conscious eye in his direction at such times, too. It gratified all the vicious vanity that was in him; and so, instead of winning him it only "set him up" the more and made him the more diligent to avoid betraying that he knew she was about. Presently she gave over skylarking, and moved irresolutely about, sighing once or twice and glancing furtively and wistfully toward Tom. Then she observed that now Tom was talking more particularly to Amy Lawrence than to any one else. She felt a sharp pang and grew disturbed and uneasy at once. She tried to go away, but her feet were treacherous, and carried her to the group instead. She said to a girl almost at Tom's elbow — with sham vivacity:

汤姆横下心，现在没有贝基·撒切尔他也行。只要有荣耀就够了。要为荣耀活着。既然他出名了，也许她想重新和好。不过，那是她的事——而他会像陌生人一样不在乎她。不久，她来了。汤姆装着没看见。跑到另一群男女孩子们中间说起话来。很快他发现，她正开心的跑来跑去，脸蛋通红，四处张望，装作追逐同学，追上一个就笑着大叫一声。他还注意到她总在他的附近抓人，每抓到一个，都好像有意向他这边瞟上一眼。汤姆那顽劣的虚荣心全得到了满足，她的举动没有赢得他，反而更让他觉得自己是个人物了，对她表示更加不动声色，视而不见。她不再嬉戏了，犹犹豫豫地走来走去，时常叹一两口气，闷闷不乐地看着汤姆。汤姆现在正和艾美·劳伦斯一人讲话，不理睬别的人。她感到一阵针扎似的难过，立马变得烦躁不安。想要走开，可是两脚不听使唤，反而把她带到那伙人那里。她假装快活的对汤姆身边的那个女孩说：

"Why, Mary Austin! you bad girl, why didn't you come to Sunday school?"

“哟，是玛丽·奥斯汀呀！你这个坏家伙，为什么你没去主日学校？”

"I did come — didn't you see me?"

“我去了——你没见我去吗？”

"Why, no! Did you? Where did you sit?"

“怎么，没看见啊。你去了？你坐在什么地方？”

"I was in Miss Peters' class, where I always go. I saw you."

“我在彼得小姐的班上，我一向去那里。不过，我看见你了。”

"Did you? Why, it's funny I didn't see you. I wanted to tell you about the picnic."

“是吗？怎么会，真有趣我居然没看见你。我原想告诉你野餐的事情。”

"Oh, that's jolly. Who's going to give it?"

“啊，那太棒了。谁来办呢？”

"My ma's going to let me have one."

“我妈打算给我办一个。”

"Oh, goody; I hope she'll let me come."

“噢，好极了，我希望她会让我参加。”

"Well, she will. The picnic's for me. She'll let anybody come that I want, and I want you."

“嗯，她会的。野餐是为我举办的。我想叫谁她都会愿意的，我想叫你来。”

"That's ever so nice. When is it going to be?"

“那真是太好了。什么时候办呀？”

"By and by. Maybe about vacation."

“不久，可能是快放假的时候。”

"Oh, won't it be fun! You going to have all the girls and boys?"

“噢，这太有意思了！你打算请所有的男女同学吗？”

"Yes, every one that's friends to me — or wants to be"; and she glanced ever so furtively at Tom, but he talked right along to Amy Lawrence about the terrible storm on the island, and how the lightning tore the great sycamore tree "all to flinders" while he was "standing within three feet of it."

“对，凡是我的朋友——还有想和我交朋友的人。”说完，她偷偷瞥了一眼汤姆，可是他正跟艾美·劳伦斯讲岛上那场可怕的暴风雨，闪电怎么把那棵大梧桐树“劈成碎片”，而他自己站得离那棵大梧桐树还“不到三英尺远”。

"Oh, may I come?" said Grace Miller.

“喂，我能参加吗？”格雷赛·米勒说。

"Yes."

“能。”

"And me?" said Sally Rogers.

“还有我呐？”莎丽·罗杰问。

"Yes."

“能。”

"And me, too?" said Susy Harper. "And Joe?"

“我也能吗？”苏赛·哈帕问道，“乔呢？”

"Yes."

“能。”

And so on, with clapping of joyful hands till all the group had begged for invitations but Tom and Amy. Then Tom turned coolly away, still talking, and took Amy with him. Becky's lips trembled and the tears came to her eyes; she hid these signs with a forced gaiety and went on chattering, but the life had gone out of the picnic, now, and out of everything else; she got away as soon as she could and hid herself and had what her sex call "a good cry." Then she sat moody, with wounded pride, till the bell rang. She roused up, now, with a vindictive cast in her eye, and gave her plaited tails a shake and said she knew what she'd do.

就这样，所有的孩子都高兴地拍着手，要求贝基请他们参加野餐，除了汤姆和艾美。汤姆冷冰冰地转过身，一边讲着话，一边带着艾美走了。贝基气得嘴唇发抖，泪水贮满了眼睛，不过她把这些都掩盖了起来，强装笑脸继续聊着。可是野餐的事现在失去了意义，一切都变得没意思。她用最快的速度离开，找个地方藏起来，照女孩们的说法“痛哭了一场”。然后闷闷不乐地坐在那里，一副自尊心受到了伤害的样子，直到上课铃响。这时，她站起来，瞪着一双怀恨的眼睛，把辫子一甩，说“我知道怎么办了”。

At recess Tom continued his flirtation with Amy with jubilant self-satisfaction. And he kept drifting about to find Becky and lacerate her with the performance. At last he spied her, but there was a sudden falling of his mercury. She was sitting cosily on a little bench behind the schoolhouse looking at a picture book with Alfred Temple — and so absorbed were they, and their heads so close together over the book, that they did not seem to be conscious of anything in the world besides. Jealousy ran red-hot through Tom's veins. He began to hate himself for throwing away the chance Becky had offered for a reconciliation. He called himself a fool, and all the hard names he could think of. He wanted to cry with vexation. Amy chatted happily along, as they walked, for her heart was singing, but Tom's tongue had lost its function. He did not hear what Amy was saying, and whenever she paused expectantly he could only stammer an awkward assent, which was as often misplaced as otherwise. He kept drifting to the rear of the schoolhouse, again and again, to sear his eyeballs with the hateful spectacle there. He could not help it. And it maddened him to see, as he thought he saw, that Becky Thatcher never once suspected that he was even in the land of the living. But she did see, nevertheless; and she knew she was winning her fight, too, and was glad to see him suffer as she had suffered.

课间休息的时候，汤姆继续和艾美逗乐，一副乐在其中，得意洋洋的样子。他晃来晃去想让贝基看见，以此来伤她的心。终于他找到了她，但情绪却一落千丈。在教室后面，贝基正舒舒服服地坐在一条小板凳上和阿尔费雷德·邓波儿一起在看画书。他们看得如此聚精会神，头也凑得很近，好像世界上所有别的事情都感觉不到了。嫉妒在汤姆的血管里燃烧。他开始怨恨自己，不该白白放弃了贝基给他的和好的机会。我真是个傻瓜。凡是能想到的话，他都拿来骂自己，直想放声大哭一场。艾美边走边聊着，她的心开心得要唱歌，而汤姆的舌头却像失去了作用，一个字也说不出来。汤姆一句话也没听进去，有时艾美停下来等他答话，他只能尴尬的结巴着回答“是”，总是前言不对后语。他一次又一次地走到教室后面，看着那可恨的一幕眼都红了，而对此却无能为力。更让他发疯的是，在他看来，贝基·撒切尔根本就当世上没有他这个人一样。实际上，贝基看见他了，知道这次较量中自己赢了，她很高兴，现在轮到汤姆受自己曾经遭过的罪了。

Amy's happy prattle became intolerable. Tom hinted at things he had to attend to; things that must be done; and time was fleeting. But in vain — the girl chirped on. Tom thought, "Oh, hang her, ain't I ever going to get rid of her?" At last he must be attending to those things — and she said artlessly that she would be "around" when school let out. And he hastened away, hating her for it.

艾美开心的叽叽喳喳变得让汤姆无法忍受。他暗示自己有事要办，刻不容缓。可是白搭——那姑娘还是喋喋不休。汤姆想：“哎，该死的，怎么老是也甩不掉她。”到后来他非走不可了，可她不解风情地说放学的时候她会来“等他”。最后他急急忙忙地跑掉了，为这恨她恨得要命。

"Any other boy!" Tom thought, grating his teeth. "Any boy in the whole town but that Saint Louis smarty that thinks he dresses so fine and is aristocracy! Oh, all right, I licked you the first day you ever saw this town, mister, and I'll lick you again! You just wait till I catch you out! I'll just take and —"

“要是别的男孩！”汤姆咬牙切齿地想。“要是这城里别的孩子那也就算了，偏偏是那个圣路易斯来的自以为是的贵族少爷！那又怎么样，你来这儿的第一天我就揍了你一顿，先生，我还要揍你一顿！你等着吧，我早晚逮到你。那我可就……”

And he went through the motions of thrashing an imaginary boy — pummeling the air, and kicking and gouging. "Oh, you do, do you? You holler 'nough, do you? Now, then, let that learn you!" And so the imaginary flogging was finished to his satisfaction.

于是他对着空气拳打，脚踢，挖眼睛，一大套动作，把那个想象中的男孩打得落花流水。“让你再这样，还敢这样么？你叫够了吧，还不求饶？哼，嘿，让你记住这个教训。”就这样这场想象中的打斗结束了，他心满意足。

Tom fled home at noon. His conscience could not endure any more of Amy's grateful happiness, and his jealousy could bear no more of the other distress. Becky resumed her picture inspections with Alfred, but as the minutes dragged along and no Tom came to suffer, her triumph began to cloud and she lost interest; gravity and absent-mindedness followed, and then melancholy; two or three times she pricked up her ear at a footstep, but it was a false hope; no Tom came. At last she grew entirely miserable and wished she hadn't carried it so far. When poor Alfred, seeing that he was losing her, he did not know how, kept exclaiming: "Oh, here's a jolly one! look at this!" she lost patience at last, and said, "Oh, don't bother me! I don't care for them!" and burst into tears, and got up and walked away.

中午，汤姆溜回了家。他的神经再也忍受不了艾美的欢乐了，他的嫉妒让他再也不能经受别的打击。贝基继续和阿尔费雷德看画书，但时间渐渐过去，汤姆却没有再来受罪，这让她的胜利蒙上了一层阴影，她失去了兴趣，心情沉重，心不在焉，郁郁寡欢。有几次她听到脚步声，立马竖起耳朵，但希望总是落空，汤姆一次也没来。最后她伤心极了，后悔自己做得太过分。那个可怜的阿尔弗雷德见她心不在焉，可是不知道怎么办，就不停地大声说：“喂，这一张真有趣！看这个！”她终于失去耐心了，说：“哼，别烦我了！我不喜欢这些东西！”说着眼泪夺眶而出，站起身，扭头就走。

Alfred dropped alongside and was going to try to comfort her, but she said:

阿尔弗雷德跟在旁边，正要安慰她，可是她却说：

"Go away and leave me alone, can't you! I hate you!"

“滚开，别管我行不行！我讨厌你！”

So the boy halted, wondering what he could have done — for she had said she would look at pictures all through the nooning — and she walked on, crying. Then Alfred went musing into the deserted schoolhouse. He was humiliated and angry. He easily guessed his way to the truth — the girl had simply made a convenience of him to vent her spite upon Tom Sawyer. He was far from hating Tom the less when this thought occurred to him. He wished there was some way to get that boy into trouble without much risk to himself. Tom's spelling book fell under his eye. Here was his opportunity. He gratefully opened to the lesson for the afternoon and poured ink upon the page.

于是男孩停下脚步，纳闷自己是不是做错了什么——因为之前她说整个中午她都要和他一块儿看画书的——可是现在却哭着走了。他想着想着，走到了空荡荡的教室。觉得受了羞辱，非常生气。很快，他就猜到了真相——这个女孩子利用他来对汤姆·索亚发泄愤恨。想到这一点，他越发痛恨汤姆。最好有什么办法既能让那家伙吃苦头又不连累自己。汤姆的拼写课本映入他的眼帘。机会来了。他满心欢喜地把书翻到下午要学的那一课，然后把墨水泼在了上面。

Becky, glancing in at a window behind him at the moment, saw the act, and moved on, without discovering herself. She started homeward, now, intending to find Tom and tell him; Tom would be thankful and their troubles would be healed. Before she was halfway home, however, she had changed her mind. The thought of Tom's treatment of her when she was talking about her picnic came scorching back and filled her with shame. She resolved to let him get whipped on the damaged spelling book's account, and to hate him forever, into the bargain.

贝基这时正好从他背后的窗子向教室里瞟了一眼，发现了阿尔弗雷德的举动，不声不响地离开了。她动身往家走，打算找到汤姆并告诉他，他一定会很感激，然后尽释前嫌。可还没走到半路，她又改变了主意。回想起她说野餐时汤姆的表现，她就怒火中烧，无地自容。她决心要让汤姆因那本拼写课本挨鞭子，另外，她要永远恨他。





Chapter 19


第十九章

TOM arrived at home in a dreary mood, and the first thing his aunt said to him showed him that he had brought his sorrows to an unpromising market:

汤姆闷闷不乐地回到家里。姨妈一见面就数落了他一通，让他觉得他的郁闷在这里也未必能减轻。

"Tom, I've a notion to skin you alive!"

“汤姆，我真想活剥了你！”

"Auntie, what have I done?"

“姨妈，我做什么了？”

"Well, you've done enough. Here I go over to Sereny Harper, like an old softy, expecting I'm going to make her believe all that rubbage about that dream, when lo and behold you she'd found out from Joe that you was over here and heard all the talk we had that night. Tom, I don't know what is to become of a boy that will act like that. It makes me feel so bad to think you could let me go to Sereny Harper and make such a fool of myself and never say a word."

“得了吧，你作得够呛。我跑去找赛伦尼·哈帕，像个老傻瓜似的，指望能让她相信你编的那个鬼梦。可是你瞧，她早就从乔那里了解到那天晚上你回来过，听见了我们的全部对话。汤姆，我不知道像你这样的孩子将来会怎么样。只要想到你让我跑到赛伦尼·哈帕那儿去，把自己弄得像个傻瓜，你却什么都不说，我就伤心透了。”

This was a new aspect of the thing. His smartness of the morning had seemed to Tom a good joke before, and very ingenious. It merely looked mean and shabby now. He hung his head and could not think of anything to say for a moment. Then he said:

没想到事情会变成这样。汤姆本以为他早上的小聪明只是个玩笑罢了，很有创意。可现在那看起来卑鄙又可耻。他耷拉着脑袋，半天想不起来说什么。最后他说：

"Auntie, I wish I hadn't done it — but I didn't think."

“姨妈，我希望我没有那么做——但是我没想到……”

"Oh, child, you never think. You never think of anything but your own selfishness. You could think to come all the way over here from Jackson's Island in the night to laugh at our troubles, and you could think to fool me with a lie about a dream; but you couldn't ever think to pity us and save us from sorrow."

“噢，孩子，你从来也想不到。你除了自己什么也不关心。你能想到夜里大老远从杰克逊岛跑来对我们幸灾乐祸；你能想到编梦撒谎来糊弄我；可你从来没想到过可怜可怜我们，不让我们那么伤心。”

"Auntie, I know now it was mean, but I didn't mean to be mean. I didn't, honest. And besides, I didn't come over here to laugh at you that night."

“姨妈，我现在知道了那很恶劣，但我不是故意这样的。我不是故意的，真的。还有，那天夜里我到这里来不是来笑话你的。”

"What did you come for, then?"

“那么，你到这里来干什么呢？”

"It was to tell you not to be uneasy about us, because we hadn't got drownded."

“是来告诉你们别为我担心，因为我们并没有淹死。”

"Tom, Tom, I would be the thankfullest soul in this world if I could believe you ever had as good a thought as that, but you know you never did — and I know it, Tom."

“汤姆啊，汤姆，我要是能相信你真有这么好心，那可就谢天谢地啰！不过，你自己明白你从来没这么想过——这我也明白，汤姆。”

"Indeed and 'deed I did, auntie — I wish I may never stir if I didn't."

“千真万确我是这么想的，姨妈——要不是这样，就让我永远也不能动弹。”

"Oh, Tom, don't lie — don't do it. It only makes things a hundred times worse."

“噢，汤姆，别撒谎了——不要这样。撒谎只能让事情变得糟糕一百倍。”

"It ain't a lie, auntie, it's the truth. I wanted to keep you from grieving — that was all that made me come."

“那不是谎话，姨妈，那是真话。我希望你不要伤心——我就是为这来的。”

"I'd give the whole world to believe that — it would cover up a power of sins, Tom. I'd 'most be glad you'd run off and acted so bad. But it ain't reasonable; because, why didn't you tell me, child?"

“我真希望能相信你的话，那可以掩盖很多缺点，汤姆。你出走做坏事，我也会感到高兴。但是那并不合理，你为什么不事先告诉我呢？”

"Why, you see, when you got to talking about the funeral, I just got all full of the idea of our coming and hiding in the church, and I couldn't somehow bear to spoil it. So I just put the bark back in my pocket and kept mum."

“为什么？你瞧，当你们讨论那个葬礼的时候，我满脑子都是跑到教堂躲起来的念头，我就是舍不得破坏了它。所以我就把树皮放回口袋里，保持沉默。”

"What bark?"

“什么树皮？”

"The bark I had wrote on to tell you we'd gone pirating. I wish, now, you'd waked up when I kissed you — I do, honest."

“上面写着我们去当海盗的树皮。说实话，我现在真希望亲吻你的时候你醒了。“

The hard lines in his aunt's face relaxed and a sudden tenderness dawned in her eyes.

姨妈绷紧的脸一下子松开了，她眼里突然闪现出慈祥的目光。

"Did you kiss me, Tom?"

“你吻了我，汤姆？”

"Why, yes, I did."

“是啊，我吻了你。”

"Are you sure you did, Tom?"

“你确定，汤姆？”

"Why, yes, I did, auntie — certain sure."

“那还用说，我确定，姨妈，百分之百确定。”

"What did you kiss me for, Tom?"

“你为什么要吻我，汤姆？”

"Because I loved you so, and you laid there moaning and I was so sorry."

“因为我很爱你，你当时躺在那里呻吟，我非常难过。”

The words sounded like truth. The old lady could not hide a tremor in her voice when she said:

这话听起来像是真的。老太太说话的时候已掩饰不住她声音中的颤抖：

"Kiss me again, Tom! — and be off with you to school, now, and don't bother me any more."

“再吻我一下，汤姆！现在你可以上学去了，不用再担心我了。”

The moment he was gone, she ran to a closet and got out the ruin of a jacket which Tom had gone pirating in. Then she stopped, with it in her hand, and said to herself:

汤姆一走，她就跑到橱子那儿，把汤姆做海盗的时候穿的那件破夹克拿出来。然后她拿着夹克，站在那里，自言自语地说：

"No, I don't dare. Poor boy, I reckon he's lied about it — but it's a blessed, blessed lie, there's such a comfort come from it. I hope the Lord — I know the Lord will forgive him, because it was such goodheartedness in him to tell it. But I don't want to find out it's a lie. I won't look."

“不，我不敢看。可怜的孩子，我猜他在撒谎——但那是个善意的谎言，让人宽慰。我希望——我知道主一定会宽恕他的，因为他心地善良才说这样的谎话的。但我情愿不知道这是个谎言。我不会去看的。”

She put the jacket away, and stood by musing a minute. Twice she put out her hand to take the garment again, and twice she refrained. Once more she ventured, and this time she fortified herself with the thought: "It's a good lie — it's a good lie — I won't let it grieve me." So she sought the jacket pocket. A moment later she was reading Tom's piece of bark through flowing tears and saying: "I could forgive the boy, now, if he'd committed a million sins!"

她把夹克放在一边，站在那里沉思了一会。有两次她伸出手去拿衣服，但又都克制住了。她又一次伸出手，这回她给自己打气：“这是个好的谎话，善意的谎话，我不会因为这个难过的。”于是她翻了夹克的口袋。然后，透过涌出的泪水，她看见了汤姆那片树皮上写的字，说：“现在，哪怕这孩子犯再多的错，我都会原谅他了！”





Chapter 20


第二十章

THERE was something about Aunt Polly's manner, when she kissed Tom, that swept away his low spirits and made him lighthearted and happy again. He started to school and had the luck of coming upon Becky Thatcher at the head of Meadow Lane. His mood always determined his manner. Without a moment's hesitation he ran to her and said:

波莉姨妈吻汤姆的时候，态度有所变化，让他的郁闷一扫而空，又轻松愉快起来。他上学去了，在草坪巷口，幸运地碰上了贝基·撒切尔，情绪一向决定着他的态度。毫不犹豫地，他跑到她跟前说：

"I acted mighty mean today, Becky, and I'm so sorry. I won't ever, ever do that way again, as long as ever I live — please make up, won't you?"

“我今天做得太过分了，贝基，我很抱歉。我这辈子，绝对绝对不会再那样做了，我们和好吧，行么？”

The girl stopped and looked him scornfully in the face:

女孩停下来，一脸鄙夷地盯着他。

"I'll thank you to keep yourself to yourself, Mr.Thomas Sawyer. I'll never speak to you again."

“你好自为之吧，我将会非常感谢你的，托马斯·索亚先生。我永远也不会再和你讲话了。”

She tossed her head and passed on. Tom was so stunned that he had not even presence of mind enough to say "Who cares, Miss Smarty?"until the right time to say it had gone by. So he said nothing. But he was in a fine rage, nevertheless. He moped into the schoolyard wishing she were a boy, and imagining how he would trounce her if she were. He presently encountered her and delivered a stinging remark as he passed. She hurled one in return, and the angry breach was complete. It seemed to Becky, in her hot resentment, that she could hardly wait for school to "take in," she was so impatient to see Tom flogged for the injured spelling book. If she had had any lingering notion of exposing Alfred Temple, Tom's offensive fling had driven it entirely away.

她一甩头走开了。汤姆一下子被说懵了，等他回过神来，想反驳一句“谁在乎啊，自以为是小姐”的时候，时机已经过去了。所以他什么也没说。可是却窝了一肚子火。他没精打采地走进校园，想象着贝基要是个男孩子，就痛打她一顿。之后碰到她，擦身而过的时候，他还骂了句刺耳的话。她回敬了一句，这下两人算是彻底决裂了。盛怒之下，贝基等不及要上课，好早一点看汤姆因为那拼写书挨罚。她本来还有点犹豫要不要揭发阿尔弗雷德·邓波尔，汤姆无礼的话完全打消了这个念头。

Poor girl, she did not know how fast she was nearing trouble herself. The master, Mr. Dobbins, had reached middle age with an unsatisfied ambition. The darling of his desires was to be a doctor, but poverty had decreed that he should be nothing higher than a village schoolmaster. Every day he took a mysterious book out of his desk and absorbed himself in it at times when no classes were reciting. He kept that book under lock and key. There was not an urchin in school but was perishing to have a glimpse of it, but the chance never came. Every boy and girl had a theory about the nature of that book; but no two theories were alike, and there was no way of getting at the facts in the case. Now, as Becky was passing by the desk, which stood near the door, she noticed that the key was in the lock! It was a precious moment. She glanced around; found herself alone, and the next instant she had the book in her hands. The title page — Professor Somebody's Anatomy — carried no information to her mind; so she began to turn the leaves. She came at once upon a handsomely engraved and colored frontispiece — a human figure, stark naked. At that moment a shadow fell on the page and Tom Sawyer stepped in at the door, and caught a glimpse of the picture. Becky snatched at the book to close it, and had the hard luck to tear the pictured page half down the middle. She thrust the volume into the desk, turned the key, and burst out crying with shame and vexation.

可怜的姑娘，她还不知道自己很快就要遇到大麻烦了。他们的老师，杜宾斯先生，人到中年却还有个未实现的愿望。他心心念念想当个医生，但贫穷却注定了他至多也就是个乡村教师。每当没课的时候，他就从讲台里拿出一本神秘的书，忘我的读着。他把那书锁得严严实实。学校里的调皮鬼没有一个不想看看那本书的，哪怕只瞟一眼，却从来没有机会。关于那本书的内容，每个男孩女孩都有一套说法，而且两个版本完全不一样，可是都没办法证实。这回，当贝基路过那张放在门边的桌子时，她发现钥匙还在锁上！这是个千载难逢的时机。她看看四周，发现就她一个人，于是马上把书拿了起来。只见扉页上写着“无名氏教授解剖学”，她没看出什么名堂来，于是就往后翻。一张精致的彩色插图映入眼帘，上面画着一个裸体的人的形象。正在这时，一个影子投在书页上，汤姆·索亚从门口进来，一眼瞥见了那张图。贝基猛地把书合上，可是不幸把那张图拦腰撕了一半。她把书扔进抽屉，锁上锁，又羞又恼地大哭起来。

"Tom Sawyer, you are just as mean as you can be, to sneak up on a person and look at what they're looking at."

“汤姆·索亚，你真卑鄙，跟踪别人，还偷看人家正在看的东西。”

"How could I know you was looking at anything?"

“我怎么知道你正在看东西？”

"You ought to be ashamed of yourself, Tom Sawyer; you know you're going to tell on me, and oh, what shall I do, what shall I do! I'll be whipped, and I never was whipped in school."

“汤姆·索亚，你应该感到害臊。你肯定会告发我的，我该怎么办，我该怎么办啊？我要挨鞭子了，我可从来没在学校里挨过鞭子啊！”

Then she stamped her little foot and said:

接着她跺着她小小的脚说：

"Be so mean if you want to! I know something that's going to happen. You just wait and you'll see! Hateful, hateful, hateful!" — and she flung out of the house with a new explosion of crying.

“你想耍卑鄙，那就随你的便！我知道就要有好事发生了。你等着瞧吧！可恶，可恶，真可恶！”接着，她又大哭一声，冲出屋子。

Tom stood still, rather flustered by this onslaught. Presently he said to himself:

汤姆一动不动站着，被这顿教训弄得不知所措。随后，他对自己说：

"What a curious kind of a fool a girl is. Never been licked in school! Shucks. What's a licking? That's just like a girl — they're so thin-skinned and chicken-hearted. Well, of course I ain't going to tell old Dobbins on this little fool, because there's other ways of getting even on her, that ain't so mean; but what of it? Old Dobbins will ask who it was tore his book. Nobody'll answer. Then he'll do just the way he always does — ask first one and then t'other, and when he comes to the right girl he'll know it, without any telling. Girls' faces always tell on them. They ain't got any backbone. She'll get licked. Well, it's a kind of a tight place for Becky Thatcher, because there ain't any way out of it." Tom conned the thing a moment longer and then added: "All right, though; she'd like to see me in just such a fix — let her sweat it out!"

“女孩子真是傻得出奇。从来没在学校里挨过打！呸！挨顿打有什么大不了？女孩子就是这样——脸皮薄，胆子小。不过，我当然不会向杜宾斯老头告发这个小傻瓜，有的是方法和她算账，用不着这么卑鄙。但那又怎么样呢？杜宾斯老头会问是谁把他的书撕了。没人会答应。然后按照老办法，他会挨个问，等问到这个女孩子，不用说他就会知道是她。女孩子的表情总是出卖她们。一点骨气也没有。她挨揍挨定了。有贝基好受的，因为她逃不掉了。汤姆又琢磨了一会：“好吧，你不是想看我倒霉么，那你就撑到底吧。”

Tom joined the mob of skylarking scholars outside. In a few moments the master arrived and school "took in." Tom did not feel a strong interest in his studies. Every time he stole a glance at the girls' side of the room Becky's face troubled him. Considering all things, he did not want to pity her, and yet it was all he could do to help it. He could get up no exultation that was really worthy the name. Presently the spelling book discovery was made, and Tom's mind was entirely full of his own matters for a while after that. Becky roused up from her lethargy of distress and showed good interest in the proceedings. She did not expect that Tom could get out of his trouble by denying that he spilt the ink on the book himself; and she was right. The denial only seemed to make the thing worse for Tom. Becky supposed she would be glad of that, and she tried to believe she was glad of it, but she found she was not certain. When the worst came to the worst, she had an impulse to get up and tell on Alfred Temple, but she made an effort and forced herself to keep still — because, said she to herself, "he'll tell about me tearing the picture sure. I wouldn't say a word, not to save his life!"

然后加入了那群在外面胡打乱闹的学生。不一会儿，老师来了，开始上课。汤姆对学习没什么兴趣。每次他偷看女生的那边，贝基的神情都令他不安。考虑到之前所有事情，他并不想同情她，可就是抑制不住觉得她可怜。他一点也高兴不起来。很快，拼音课本上的墨迹被发现了，之后有一段时间，汤姆脑子里都是他自己的麻烦。贝基从郁闷的情绪中回过神来，对事态发展表现出了极大兴趣。她早就猜到，就算汤姆自己否认把墨水洒在书上，也开脱不了。她的预料是正确的。否认只让事情变得更糟。贝基以为她会为此感到高兴，也试着让自己相信她真的高兴，结果却发现她并不确定。当事态越来越糟，她甚至有种站起来揭发阿尔弗雷德·邓波尔的冲动，可她竭力强迫自己保持沉默，因为，她对自己讲，“他一定会把我撕了那张图的事说出去。我不会为他讲一句话的！”

Tom took his whipping and went back to his seat not at all brokenhearted, for he thought it was possible that he had unknowingly upset the ink on the spelling book himself, in some skylarking bout — he had denied it for form's sake and because it was custom, and had stuck to the denial from principle.

汤姆挨了鞭子，回到自己的座位上，一点也不伤心，因为他觉得有可能是自己在打打闹闹的时候，无意间打翻了墨水弄脏了书。他之所以否认，是为了走个过场，这也是他的一贯作风，要坚持原则，死不认错。

A whole hour drifted by, the master sat nodding on his throne, the air was drowsy with the hum of study. By and by, Mr. Dobbins straightened himself up, yawned, then unlocked his desk, and reached for his book, but seemed undecided whether to take it out or leave it. Most of the pupils glanced up languidly, but there were two among them that watched his movements with intent eyes. Mr. Dobbins fingered his book absently for a while, then took it out and settled himself in his chair to read! Tom shot a glance at Becky. He had seen a hunted and helpless rabbit look as she did, with a gun leveled at its head. Instantly he forgot his quarrel with her. Quick — something must be done! done in a flash, too! But the very imminence of the emergency paralyzed his invention. Good! — he had an inspiration! He would run and snatch the book, spring through the door and fly. But his resolution shook for one little instant, and the chance was lost — the master opened the volume. If Tom only had the wasted opportunity back again! Too late. There was no help for Becky now, he said. The next moment the master faced the school. Every eye sank under his gaze. There was that in it which smote even the innocent with fear. There was silence while one might count ten; the master was gathering his wrath. Then he spoke:

一个小时过去了，老师坐在他的座位上打盹，教室里一片嗡嗡的读书声令人困乏。渐渐地，杜宾斯先生挺直身子，打着哈欠，然后打开抽屉的锁，伸手要拿他的书，可是看起来有些犹豫。大多数学生都没精打采地抬起头看了一眼，但是其中有两个人特别关注着老师的一举一动。杜宾斯先生心不在焉地摸了一会儿那本书，然后拿了出来，身体往椅子一靠看起来。汤姆瞥了贝基一眼。只见她就像一只被猎人追捕的无助的兔子，猎枪正对着它的头。他立刻忘掉了他们之间的争吵。快点——必须采取行动！快点做些什么！可是紧要关头，他的创造力却一点也发挥不出来。好！他突然来了灵感。他可以冲上去，一把从老师手里抢过书，夺门而逃。就在他正要下决心这么办的时候，机会跑掉了——老师翻开了书。要是汤姆再有一次机会该多好！太晚了。现在什么也帮不了贝基了，他心说。紧接着，老师抬头面朝大家。在他的注视下，所有人都垂下了眼帘。连没犯错的人都被吓得不行。寂静持续了大约十秒钟，老师越来越生气。终于，他问：

"Who tore this book?"

“这书是谁撕的？”

There was not a sound. One could have heard a pin drop. The stillness continued; the master searched face after face for signs of guilt.

没人回答。教室里静得掉根针都能听见。寂静持续着，老师挨个检查，看谁面带愧色。

"Benjamin Rogers, did you tear this book?"

“本杰明·罗杰斯，书是你撕的吗？”

A denial. Another pause.

不是。又一阵沉默。

"Joseph Harper, did you?"

“约瑟夫·哈帕，是你干的？”

Another denial. Tom's uneasiness grew more and more intense under the slow torture of these proceedings. The master scanned the ranks of the boys — considered a while, then turned to the girls:

也不是。询问不紧不慢地进行着，汤姆越来越紧张。老师问完男生，想了一会儿，转向了女生。

"Amy Lawrence?"

“艾美·劳伦斯？”

A shake of the head.

她摇了摇头。

"Gracie Miller?"

“格雷斯·米勒？”

The same sign.

同样摇了摇头。

"Susan Harper, did you do this?"

“苏珊·哈帕，是你干的吗？”

Another negative. The next girl was Becky Thatcher. Tom was trembling from head to foot with excitement and a sense of the hopelessness of the situation.

又是一个否认。下一个就是贝基·撒切尔了。汤姆紧张得从头到脚都在颤抖，他觉得事情简直绝望了。

"Rebecca Thatcher" (Tom glanced at her face — it was white with terror) — "did you tear — no, look me in the face" (her hands rose in appeal) — "did you tear this book?"

“瑞贝卡·撒切尔，”（汤姆向她脸上瞟了一眼，她吓得脸色苍白）——“是你撕……不，看着我的眼睛。”（她承认地举起手来）——“是你撕坏了这本书吗？”

A thought shot like lightning through Tom's brain. He sprang to his feet and shouted — "I done it!"

这时，一个念头闪电般划过汤姆的脑海。他猛地站起来，大声说道：“是我干的！”

The school stared in perplexity at this incredible folly. Tom stood a moment, to gather his dismembered faculties; and when he stepped forward to go to his punishment the surprise, the gratitude, the adoration that shone upon him out of poor Becky's eyes seemed pay enough for a hundred floggings. Inspired by the splendor of his own act, he took without an outcry the most merciless flaying that even Mr. Dobbins had ever administered; and also received with indifference the added cruelty of a command to remain two hours after school should be dismissed — for he knew who would wait for him outside till his captivity was done, and not count the tedious time as loss, either.

全班同学迷惑不解地盯着这个大傻瓜。汤姆站了一会，振作一下。当他走上前去接受惩罚时，可怜的贝基眼里流露出的震惊、感激、敬慕之情，让他觉得就算挨上一百鞭也值得。汤姆为自己的义举热血沸腾，他一声没吭地挨了杜宾斯先生有史以来最严酷的鞭笞，还满不在乎地接受了放学后留校两小时的惩罚，因为他知道有人会在学校外面等着他，直到惩罚结束，全然不在乎浪费时间。

Tom went to bed that night planning vengeance against Alfred Temple; for with shame and repentance Becky had told him all, not forgetting her own treachery; but even the longing for vengeance had to give way, soon, to pleasanter musings, and he fell asleep at last with Becky's latest words lingering dreamily in his ear —

当天晚上，汤姆躺在床上合计着如何报复阿尔弗雷德·邓波尔。贝基又羞又悔，把事情全盘托出，也没忘了讲自己的背叛。不过，复仇的渴望很快变成了快乐的回想。他终于沉入了梦乡，耳边还隐隐约约的回荡着贝基刚刚的话：

"Tom, how could you be so noble!"

“汤姆，你真是太高尚了！”





Chapter 21


第二十一章

VACATION was approaching. The schoolmaster, always severe, grew severer and more exacting than ever, for he wanted the school to make a good showing on "Examination" day. His rod and his ferule were seldom idle now — at least among the smaller pupils. Only the biggest boys, and young ladies of eighteen and twenty, escaped lashing. Mr. Dobbins' lashings were very vigorous ones, too; for although he carried, under his wig, a perfectly bald and shiny head, he had only reached middle age, and there was no sign of feebleness in his muscle. As the great day approached, all the tyranny that was in him came to the surface; he seemed to take a vindictive pleasure in punishing the least shortcomings. The consequence was, that the smaller boys spent their days in terror and suffering and their nights in plotting revenge. They threw away no opportunity to do the master a mischief. But he kept ahead all the time. The retribution that followed every vengeful success was so sweeping and majestic that the boys always retired from the field badly worsted. At last they conspired together and hit upon a plan that promised a dazzling victory. They swore in the sign painter's boy, told him the scheme, and asked his help. He had his own reasons for being delighted, for the master boarded in his father's family and had given the boy ample cause to hate him.

假期越来越近了。为了同学们在考试日能有好的表现，一向严厉的老师现在变得比以往任何时候都更严格、苛刻。他手中的教鞭和戒尺很少闲着，至少对那些年龄较小的同学是这样的。只有最大的男孩子和18到20岁的年轻姑娘才不挨打。杜宾斯先生的鞭子打得特别重。别看他假发下面顶着个光秃秃脑袋，他可是刚到中年，身上的肌肉没有一点松弛的迹象。随着“大考”的临近，他的暴政渐渐暴露无遗。哪怕是最微不足道的小错，他也要借机发挥，似乎乐在其中。结果弄得年龄较小的男孩子惶惶不得终日，晚上就盘算着如何进行报复。他们从不放过任何一个给老师捣乱的机会。但是老师总是道高一丈。伴随着每一次报复得逞的，是风卷残云、势不可挡的惩罚，孩子们总是不堪一击，败下阵来。最后，他们同心协力，想出一条妙计，一定要取得辉煌的胜利。还让做招牌人的孩子发誓保密，然后把秘密计划告诉他，请他帮忙。他之所以乐意帮忙是有自己的原因的，原来这位老师在他家吃饭，在很多事情上已经得罪了这个孩子。

The master's wife would go on a visit to the country in a few days, and there would be nothing to interfere with the plan; the master always prepared himself for great occasions by getting pretty well fuddled, and the sign painter's boy said that when the dominie had reached the proper condition on Examination Evening he would "manage the thing" while he napped in his chair; then he would have him awakened at the right time and hurried away to school.

过几天，老师的太太要到乡下去串门，这样就没有什么能阻碍他们的计划了。在为重要日子作准备的时候，老师总会喝得酩酊大醉。做招牌的人的孩子说大考那天晚上，等老师醉得差不多了，在椅子上打盹的时候，他就“下手”，然后到点叫醒他，催他快到学校去。

In the fullness of time the interesting occasion arrived. At eight in the evening the schoolhouse was brilliantly lighted, and adorned with wreaths and festoons of foliage and flowers. The master sat throned in his great chair upon a raised platform, with his blackboard behind him. He was looking tolerably mellow. Three rows of benches on each side and six rows in front of him were occupied by the dignitaries of the town and by the parents of the pupils.

终于，时机成熟，那个有趣的时刻要来临了。晚上八点，教室里灯火通明，装饰着花环和用叶子和花朵做的串饰。在高高的讲台上，老师像皇帝一样坐在那把大椅子里，身后就是黑板。他看上去一副晕乎乎心情不错的样子。在他的两边各有三排长凳，前面还有六排，坐的是镇上的大人物和学生家长。

To his left, back of the rows of citizens, was a spacious temporary platform upon which were seated the scholars who were to take part in the exercises of the evening; rows of small boys, washed and dressed to an intolerable state of discomfort; rows of gawky big boys; snowbanks of girls and young ladies clad in lawn and muslin and conspicuously conscious of their bare arms, their grandmothers' ancient trinkets, their bits of pink and blue ribbon and the flowers in their hair. All the rest of the house was filled with nonparticipating scholars.

左边，成排座位的后面，是一个临时搭起的大台子，今晚参加考试的学生都坐在这里。一排排小男孩，被拾捣得整整齐齐，让人觉得都有点不自在；一排排大男孩，看起来呆头呆脑的；小女孩和大姑娘们都穿着雪白的细麻和薄纱做的衣服，头上戴着祖母传下来的古老的小装饰，或者粉蓝相间的发带和鲜花，因为露着胳膊而明显有些局促不安。教室剩下的地方坐满了不用参加考试的学生。

The exercises began. A very little boy stood up and sheepishly recited, "You'd scarce expect one of my age to speak in public on the stage," etc.— accompanying himself with the painfully exact and spasmodic gestures which a machine might have used — supposing the machine to be a trifle out of order. But he got through safely, though cruelly scared, and got a fine round of applause when he made his manufactured bow and retired.

考试开始了。一个年龄很小的男孩子站了起来，腼腆的按事先准备好的说了些“大家可能没有想到，像我这年龄的孩子会到讲台上来当众演讲”之类的话，还伴随着极度刻板僵硬的手势，像台机器，或者说是有点故障的机器。尽管吓得要命，他还是顺利的讲完了，然后机械的鞠躬退场，并获得了全场一阵热烈的掌声。

A little shamefaced girl lisped "Mary had a little lamb," etc., performed a compassion-inspiring curtsy, got her meed of applause, and sat down flushed and happy.

一个小女孩满脸羞怯，有点大舌头地背诵了“玛丽有只小羊羔”等，然后十分认真地行了个屈膝礼，博得一阵掌声后，红着脸，高兴地坐了下来。

Tom Sawyer stepped forward with conceited confidence and soared into the unquenchable and indestructible "Give me liberty or give me death" speech, with fine fury and frantic gesticulation, and broke down in the middle of it. A ghastly stage fright seized him, his legs quaked under him and he was like to choke. True, he had the manifest sympathy of the house — but he had the house's silence, too, which was even worse than its sympathy. The master frowned, and this completed the disaster. Tom struggled a while and then retired, utterly defeated. There was a weak attempt at applause, but it died early.

汤姆·索亚十分自信，甚至有点自负地走上前去，大声背起了那千古名篇《不自由，毋宁死》。他慷慨陈词，做着夸张的手势，结果背到一半卡住了。怯场的感觉像魔鬼一样攫住了他，他两腿发颤，快要窒息了似的。所有在场的人十分同情他，教室里一片安静，这让他觉得比同情更难受。老师皱起了眉头，这下全砸了。汤姆挣扎了一会，终于灰溜溜的退下场去。台下的人想鼓一两掌，可掌声刚起就消失了。

"The Boy Stood on the Burning Deck" followed; also "The Assyrian Came Down," and other declamatory gems. Then there were reading exercises, and a spelling fight. The meager Latin class recited with honor. The prime feature of the evening was in order, now — original "compositions" by the young ladies. Each in her turn stepped forward to the edge of the platform, cleared her throat, held up her manuscript (tied with dainty ribbon), and proceeded to read, with labored attention to "expression" and punctuation. The themes were the same that had been illuminated upon similar occasions by their mothers before them, their grandmothers, and doubtless all their ancestors in the female line clear back to the Crusades. "Friendship" was one; "Memories of Other Days"; "Religion in History"; "Dream Land"; "The Advantages of Culture"; "Forms of Political Government Compared and Contrasted"; "Melancholy"; "Filial Love"; "Heart Longings," etc., etc.

跟着是《那个男孩子站在燃烧的甲板上》，还有《亚述人走来了》等一些名篇。接下来是朗读表演和拼写比赛。寥寥数人的拉丁语班背诵时显得无比自豪。晚上的压轴表演终于到了——姑娘们自己的“原创大作”。大家一个接一个走到讲台边，清清嗓子，举起稿子（用鲜艳的缎带扎着），“满怀深情”，一字一顿，卖力地念了起来。文章的主题早被她们的母亲，祖母，甚至是十字军时期的祖祖辈辈的女人们，在同样场合下发挥过了。《友情论》是其中之一，还有《昔日重来》、《历史上的宗教》、《梦境》、《文化的优点》、《政体比照论》、《伤感》、《孝道》、《心愿》等等。

A prevalent feature in these compositions was a nursed and petted melancholy; another was a wasteful and opulent gush of "fine language"; another was a tendency to lug in by the ears particularly prized words and phrases until they were worn entirely out; and a peculiarity that conspicuously marked and marred them was the inveterate and intolerable sermon that wagged its crippled tail at the end of each and every one of them. No matter what the subject might be, a brain-racking effort was made to squirm it into some aspect or other that the moral and religious mind could contemplate with edification. The glaring insincerity of these sermons was not sufficient to compass the banishment of the fashion from the schools, and it is not sufficient today; it never will be sufficient while the world stands, perhaps. There is no school in all our land where the young ladies do not feel obliged to close their compositions with a sermon; and you will find that the sermon of the most frivolous and the least religious girl in the school is always the longest and the most relentlessly pious. But enough of this. Homely truth is unpalatable.

这类文章的通病，一是矫揉造作，无病呻吟；二是堆砌辞藻，华而不实；三是生搬硬套，老生常谈。还有个明显的败笔之处：就是每篇文章的结尾都有一段根深蒂固、难以忍受的说教词，像截断尾巴一样晃来晃去。不管文章主题是什么，她们都绞尽脑汁地扯上些道德或宗教上的启示。说教的虚伪一望便知，可这种风气仍然没有在学校里消失，不只是现在不能，也许只要世界存在一天，就永远也消灭不了。在咱们国家，没有哪所学校的女生不觉得一定要在文章的结尾加上一段说教的。而且你会发现越是那些不守规矩、没有信仰的女孩，说词就越长、越虔诚。到此为止好了。朴素的真理都是难以接受的。

Let us return to the "Examination." The first composition that was read was one entitled "Is this, then, Life?" Perhaps the reader can endure an extract from it: In the common walks of life, with what delightful emotions does the youthful mind look forward to some anticipated scene of festivity! Imagination is busy sketching rose-tinted pictures of joy. In fancy, the voluptuous votary of fashion sees herself amid the festive throng, "the observed of all observers." Her graceful form, arrayed in snowy robes, is whirling through the mazes of the joyous dance; her eye is brightest, her step is lightest in the gay assembly.

我们再接着讲“大考”。朗读的第一篇文章的题目是《难道这就是生活吗？》。下面摘录一段“以飨”读者：芸芸众生中，漫漫长路上，年轻的心灵们是怀着怎样的欢愉，憧憬着节日的景象啊。想象力如脱缰一般，描绘出一幅幅玫瑰色欢乐的场景。梦幻中，时尚的弄潮儿发现自己置身于欢乐的人群中，成了所有人的焦点。她优雅的身躯裹在素装长袍中，在迷宫一般的舞池中翩翩起舞。欢乐的人群中，数她的眼睛最明亮，她的步伐最轻盈。

In such delicious fancies time quickly glides by, and the welcome hour arrives for her entrance into the elysian world, of which she has had such bright dreams. How fairylike does everything appear to her enchanted vision! Each new scene is more charming than the last. But after a while she finds that beneath this goodly exterior, all is vanity: the flattery which once charmed her soul, now grates harshly upon her ear; the ballroom has lost its charms; and with wasted health and embittered heart, she turns away with the conviction that earthly pleasures cannot satisfy the longings of the soul!

梦幻美妙，时光如梭，她此刻幸福得仿佛在天堂的入口，一个她梦中萦绕的地方。在她眼中，一切都像在童话中，施了魔法。每一处新景色都比上一个更吸引人。可是不久，她发现浮华外表下，一切都是镜花水月：曾经令她心花怒放的甜言蜜语，现在变得刺耳起来；舞厅失去了魔力；她身心憔悴地退出，明白了世俗之乐不能够慰藉心灵的企求！

And so forth and so on. There was a buzz of gratification from time to time during the reading, accompanied by whispered ejaculations of "How sweet!""How eloquent!" "So true!" etc., and after the thing had closed with a peculiarly afflicting sermon the applause was enthusiastic.

诸如此类。朗读的时候，人群中不时发出一阵满意的嗡嗡声，伴随着：“多么美好！”“多么流畅！”“说得太对了！”等等，当最后一段折磨人的说教词结束的时候，掌声异常热烈。

Then arose a slim, melancholy girl, whose face had the "interesting" paleness that comes of pills and indigestion, and read a "poem." Two stanzas of it will do:

下一个站起来的是一位身材瘦弱、性格忧郁的女孩，脸色苍白得吓人，那是经常服药和消化不良造成的，她要朗诵一首“诗”。这里节选其中两节就可以了：

A MISSOURI MAIDEN'S FAREWELL TO ALABAMA

密苏里少女告别阿拉巴马

Alabama, good-bye! I love thee well! But yet for awhile do I leave thee now! Sad, yes, sad thoughts of thee my heart doth swell, And burning recollections throng my brow! For I have wandered through thy flowery woods; Have roamed and read near Tallapoosa's stream; Have listened to Tallassee's warring floods, And wooed on Coosa's side Aurora's beam. Yet shame I not to bear an o'er-full heart, Nor blush to turn behind my tearful eyes; 'Tis from no stranger land I now must part, 'Tis to no strangers left I yield these sighs. Welcome and home were mine within this State, Whose vales I leave — whose spires fade fast from me; And cold must be mine eyes, and heart, and tête, When, dear Alabama! they turn cold on thee!

再见，阿拉巴马！我爱你笃深！离别在即，难舍难分。悲伤，是的，悲伤的思绪在我心中涌起，往事历历在胸间燃烧！曾记否，万花丛中有我徜徉的足迹，德拉波斯溪旁有我琅琅的书声；我听过德达西的流水如万马奔腾，我见过库萨山巅晨曦的分娩。我心系百事，无悔无怨，含泪回首，无愧我心。我告别的不是异乡，我叹息的不是他客。我的家在这里！可如今我将远离这里的高山深谷。我的眼，我的心都将冷掉，我将告别人寰，亲爱的阿拉巴马。若我离开了你！

There were very few there who knew what "tête" meant, but the poem was very satisfactory, nevertheless.

在场的人没有几个理解“人寰”的意思，不过这首诗还是令人满意的。

Next appeared a dark-complexioned, black-eyed, blackhaired young lady, who paused an impressive moment, assumed a tragic expression, and began to read in a measured, solemn tone.

接着又上来一位年轻的姑娘，黑眼睛、黑头发连皮肤也黝黑。她停顿了很长一段时间，酝酿出一副悲情的样子，然后用庄严而又有节奏的语调念了起来。

A VISION

景色

Dark and tempestuous was night. Around the throne on high not a single star quivered; but the deep intonations of the heavy thunder constantly vibrated upon the ear; whilst the terrific lightning revelled in angry mood through the cloudy chambers of heaven, seeming to scorn the power exerted over its terror by the illustrious Franklin! Even the boisterous winds unanimously came forth from their mystic homes, and blustered about as if to enhance by their aid the wildness of the scene.

夜色深沉，狂风肆虐，暴雨倾盆。老天爷高高在上，四周无半点星辰闪烁，然而炸雷滚滚，震耳欲聋，愤怒的闪电刺破乌云，划开夜空，像是在嘲笑富兰克林的勇气。连狂暴的风也肆虐而出，助长了雷电的气焰，场面荒凉无比。

At such a time, so dark, so dreary, for human sympathy my very spirit sighed; but instead thereof,

就在这个时刻，如此漆黑，如此恐怖，我都不禁为富兰克林捏了一把汗，但这时，

"My dearest friend, my counsellor, my comforter and guide — My joy in grief, my second bliss in joy," came to my side.

“我最亲爱的朋友、老师、我的安慰者和向导——我的悲伤中的快乐，我随着欢乐而来的福，”来到我身边。

She moved like one of those bright beings pictured in the sunny walks of fancy's Eden by the romantic and young, a queen of beauty unadorned save by her own transcendent loveliness. So soft was her step, it failed to make even a sound, and but for the magical thrill imparted by her genial touch, as other unobtrusive beauties, she would have glided away unperceived — unsought. A strange sadness rested upon her features, like icy tears upon the robe of December, as she pointed to the contending elements without, and bade me contemplate the two beings presented.

她像浪漫的年轻画家画中的仙女一般，漫步在伊甸园的阳光下，一个朴实无华巧夺天工的绝代佳人。步履轻盈，无声无息，要不是她的轻抚，令人神奇，为之震颤，她会像其他仙女一样，不知不觉间飘走，消失得无影无踪。她指着外面酣战的狂风暴雨，要我想想它们象征着什么；她脸上挂着莫名其妙的哀愁，就像寒冬腊月里的雨雪。

This nightmare occupied some ten pages of manuscript and wound up with a sermon so destructive of all hope to non-Presbyterians that it took the first prize. This composition was considered to be the very finest effort of the evening. The mayor of the village, in delivering the prize to the author of it, made a warm speech in which he said that it was by far the most "eloquent" thing he had ever listened to, and that Daniel Webster himself might well be proud of it.

这个噩梦般的朗诵有十多页稿纸，以一段说教词结束，把非长老会教徒说得一点希望都没有，还因此获得了头奖。这片作文被认为是当天晚上最优秀的作品。镇长在给作者颁奖时，发表了一番热情洋溢的讲话，声称这是他平生听到的最“美好”的文章，连大演说家丹尼尔·韦伯斯特听了也会感到骄傲的。

It may be remarked, in passing, that the number of compositions in which the word "beauteous" was overfondled, and human experience referred to as "life's page," was up to the usual average.

顺便说一下，这种“美好”泛滥，用“人生的一页”比喻人生经历的文章，平常数量也不少。

Now the master, mellow almost to the verge of geniality, put his chair aside, turned his back to the audience, and began to draw a map of America on the blackboard, to exercise the geography class upon. But he made a sad business of it with his unsteady hand, and a smothered titter rippled over the house. He knew what the matter was and set himself to right it. He sponged out lines and remade them; but he only distorted them more than ever, and the tittering was more pronounced. He threw his entire attention upon his work, now, as if determined not to be put down by the mirth. He felt that all eyes were fastened upon him; he imagined he was succeeding, and yet the tittering continued; it even manifestly increased. And well it might. There was a garret above, pierced with a scuttle over his head; and down through this scuttle came a cat, suspended around the haunches by a string; she had a rag tied about her head and jaws to keep her from mewing; as she slowly descended she curved upward and clawed at the string, she swung downward and clawed at the intangible air. The tittering rose higher and higher — the cat was within six inches of the absorbed teacher's head — down, down, a little lower, and she grabbed his wig with her desperate claws, clung to it, and was snatched up into the garret in an instant with her trophy still in her possession! And how the light did blaze abroad from the master's bald pate — for the sign painter's boy had gilded it!

老师这时醉得几乎是一副和蔼可亲的样子了。他推开椅子，背对着观众，开始在黑板上画美国地图，为考地理课作准备。可他哆哆嗦嗦，把图画得不像样，大家忍不住窃笑起来。他心里清楚大家在笑什么，于是就着手修改，擦去一些线，然后又画上，结果画得比原来的还差，笑声更加肆无忌惮了。他拿出看家本事，好像下定决心决不被笑声打倒。所有人的目光都集中在他身上，他觉得自己终于画成了，可是下面的笑声还在继续，并且明显地越来越大。可不是要笑么。原来屋顶上有个阁楼，在正对着老师的头顶的地方开了个小窗，从那里吊出来一只猫，后腿上绑着绳子，头和嘴用破布扎上了，叫不出声来。她一边下降，一边向上蜷起身体去抓绳子，晃来晃去，在空中乱舞一通。大家的笑声越来越大。老师正专心作画，猫离他的头只有六英寸远了。往下，往下，再近一点，终于猫在绝望中一下子抓住了老师的假发，死不松爪，接着又被一下子拽回了阁楼，连着那假发一起。老师的秃头顿时光彩四射，因为那个做招牌人的孩子已经给它上了一层光！

That broke up the meeting. The boys were avenged. Vacation had come.

考试就此结束，孩子们报了仇，假期来临了。





Chapter 22


第二十二章

TOM joined the new order of Cadets of Temperance, being attracted by the showy character of their "regalia." He promised to abstain from smoking, chewing, and profanity as long as he remained a member. Now he found out a new thing — namely, that to promise not to do a thing is the surest way in the world to make a body want to go and do that very thing. Tom soon found himself tormented with a desire to drink and swear; the desire grew to be so intense that nothing but the hope of a chance to display himself in his red sash kept him from withdrawing from the order. Fourth of July was coming; but he soon gave that up — gave it up before he had worn his shackles over forty-eight hours — and fixed his hopes upon old Judge Frazer, justice of the peace, who was apparently on his deathbed and would have a big public funeral, since he was so high an official. During three days Tom was deeply concerned about the Judge's condition and hungry for news of it. Sometimes his hopes ran high — so high that he would venture to get out his regalia and practice before the looking glass. But the Judge had a most discouraging way of fluctuating. At last he was pronounced upon the mend — and then convalescent. Tom was disgusted; and felt a sense of injury, too. He handed in his resignation at once — and that night the Judge suffered a relapse and died. Tom resolved that he would never trust a man like that again.

汤姆被少年节制会神气的“绶带”吸引住了，就成了该组织的新成员，保证作为会员期间，不抽烟，不嚼烟，不渎神。之后他有了个新发现——那就是，嘴上保证不做某件事，恰恰让人更想那么做。汤姆很快就发现自己被一种强烈的欲望所折磨，想喝酒，想骂人。这种欲望变得如此强烈，要不是想到自己能有机会带着红肩带好好露把脸，他早就退会了。七月四号快要到了（美国独立纪念日），但不久他就放弃了这天——戴上“枷锁”还不到四十八个小时就放弃了——转而把希望寄托在治安法官弗雷塞老头身上。这老头显然快要入土了，而且他身居要职，死后一定会有一个盛大的丧礼。三天以来，汤姆深切关注着法官的身体状况，如饥似渴地等着他去世的消息。有时，他的希望似乎触手可及——他甚至大胆地拿出他的绶带，对着镜子自我演示一番。但法官的病情时起时落，汤姆失望极了。后来，医生宣布他正慢慢好转——接着居然康复了。汤姆极其气愤；甚至觉得自己受了伤害。于是他马上申请退会——但就在当晚，法官旧病复发，一命呜呼。汤姆发誓以后再也不相信这种人了。

The funeral was a fine thing. The Cadets paraded in a style calculated to kill the late member with envy. Tom was a free boy again, however — there was something in that. He could drink and swear, now — but found to his surprise that he did not want to. The simple fact that he could, took the desire away, and the charm of it.

丧礼颇为隆重。少年节制会的会员们神气十足地列队游行，让那位前会员忌妒得要死。但不管怎么说，汤姆又恢复了自由，这很有意义。他又可以喝酒骂人了——可是他惊奇地发现自己竟然不想这样做了。正因为他可以随心所欲，那些事情反而失去了魅力，他的欲望也随之不见了。

Tom presently wondered to find that his coveted vacation was beginning to hang a little heavily on his hands.

汤姆不久就感到，梦寐以求的暑假开始变得沉闷冗长起来。

He attempted a diary — but nothing happened during three days, and so he abandoned it.

他尝试着写写日记——但三天以来，什么稀罕事儿也没发生，于是就把日记本扔到一边。

The first of all the negro minstrel shows came to town, and made a sensation. Tom and Joe Harper got up a band of performers and were happy for two days.

一支一流的黑人演奏队来到了小镇，引起了一阵轰动。汤姆和哈帕组织了一队演出人员，疯了那么两天。

Even the Glorious Fourth was in some sense a failure, for it rained hard, there was no procession in consequence, and the greatest man in the world (as Tom supposed), Mr. Benton, an actual United States Senator, proved an overwhelming disappointment — for he was not twenty-five feet high, nor even anywhere in the neighborhood of it.

就连光荣的七月四日，从某种意义上说，也很失败。那天下了场大雨，所以没有游行，而世界上最伟大的人物（在汤姆看来），一个真正的美国参议员，本顿先生，也令人大为失望——实际上他并没有二十五英尺高，甚至连这个边都挨不上。

A circus came. The boys played circus for three days afterward in tents made of rag carpeting — admission, three pins for boys, two for girls — and then circusing was abandoned.

一个马戏团来了。那之后，孩子们用破毯子搭起一个帐篷，一连玩了三天的马戏——入场券是：男孩子要三根别针，女孩子要两根——不久，马戏也不玩了。

A phrenologist and a mesmerizer came — and went again and left the village duller and drearier than ever.

后来，又来了一个相面的和一个催眠师——之后他们也走了，这个镇子越发沉闷、乏味。

There were some boys-and-girls' parties, but they were so few and so delightful that they only made the aching voids between ache the harder.

之后又举办了几次男孩子和女孩子的联欢会，但次数极为有限，而且那欢乐的气氛让没有联欢会的日子显得更难熬了。

Becky Thatcher was gone to her Constantinople home to stay with her parents during vacation — so there was no bright side to life anywhere.

贝基·撒切尔和她父母一起去康士坦丁堡镇的家过暑假——所以，无论怎么折腾，都没有乐趣可言。

The dreadful secret of the murder was a chronic misery. It was a very cancer for permanency and pain.

还有那个可怕的谋杀案的秘密不断折磨着汤姆。就像一个无法摆脱的瘤子，隐隐作痛。

Then came the measles.

接着，汤姆又患上了麻疹。

During two long weeks Tom lay a prisoner, dead to the world and its happenings. He was very ill, he was interested in nothing. When he got upon his feet at last and moved feebly down town, a melancholy change had come over everything and every creature. There had been a "revival," and everybody had "got religion," not only the adults, but even the boys and girls. Tom went about, hoping against hope for the sight of one blessed sinful face, but disappointment crossed him everywhere. He found Joe Harper studying a Testament, and turned sadly away from the depressing spectacle. He sought Ben Rogers, and found him visiting the poor with a basket of tracts. He hunted up Jim Hollis, who called his attention to the precious blessing of his late measles as a warning. Every boy he encountered added another ton to his depression; and when, in desperation, he flew for refuge at last to the bosom of Huckleberry Finn and was received with a Scriptural quotation, his heart broke and he crept home and to bed realizing that he alone of all the town was lost, forever and forever.

在漫长的两周里，汤姆像个犯人似地在家躺着，与世隔绝。他病得很厉害，对什么都提不起兴趣。当他终于能起身下床，虚弱地到镇子里转转的时候，他郁闷的发现所有人和事都变了。镇上有过一次“信仰复兴会”，大家都“信主”了，不仅是大人，男孩和女孩也不例外。汤姆走了一圈，在绝望之中希望能看见哪怕一个被上帝放过的罪恶的面孔，结果处处使他失望。他发现乔·哈帕正在啃《圣经》，于是难过地逃离了这个扫兴的场景。本·罗杰斯正带着一篮子布道的小册子去看望穷人们。而吉姆·荷利斯提醒说，他最近得的麻疹是上帝仁慈的警示。每遇到一个孩子，他的失落就多一分。最后，绝望中，他逃难似的跑到好友哈克贝利·费恩那儿，想不到他也引用《圣经》上的一段话来迎接他。汤姆的心凉透了，他悄悄溜回家，躺在床上，意识到全镇人中，只有他自己永远、永远地成了一只“迷途的羔羊”。

And that night there came on a terrific storm, with driving rain, awful claps of thunder and blinding sheets of lightning. He covered his head with the bedclothes and waited in a horror of suspense for his doom; for he had not the shadow of a doubt that all this hubbub was about him. He believed he had taxed the forbearance of the powers above to the extremity of endurance and that this was the result. It might have seemed to him a waste of pomp and ammunition to kill a bug with a battery of artillery, but there seemed nothing incongruous about the getting up such an expensive thunderstorm as this to knock the turf from under an insect like himself.

就在那天晚上刮起了一场可怕的暴风雨，大雨滂沱，电闪雷鸣。汤姆用床单蒙着头，战战兢兢地等待着自己的末日降临。因为他一点也不怀疑，所有的狂风暴雨都是冲着他来的。他深信是他把上帝惹得忍无可忍，这一切都是他的报应。在他看来，用一排大炮来消灭一只小虫，也未免太浪费弹药了。但要把他这样的一条害虫揪出来彻底铲除，这样一场狂风暴雨似乎也不为过。

By and by the tempest spent itself and died without accomplishing its object. The boy's first impulse was to be grateful, and reform. His second was to wait — for there might not be any more storms.

渐渐的，暴风雨筋疲力尽，还没达到消灭汤姆的目的就休兵了。这孩子的第一个冲动就是谢天谢地，准备脱胎换骨。第二个反应是等待——因为兴许今后不会再有暴风雨了呢。

The next day the doctors were back; Tom had relapsed. The three weeks he spent on his back this time seemed an entire age. When he got abroad at last he was hardly grateful that he had been spared, remembering how lonely was his estate, how companionless and forlorn he was. He drifted listlessly down the street and found Jim Hollis acting as judge in a juvenile court that was trying a cat for murder, in the presence of her victim, a bird. He found Joe Harper and Huck Finn up an alley eating a stolen melon. Poor lads! they — like Tom — had suffered a relapse.

第二天，医生们又来了；汤姆的病又犯了。这一次，他在床上躺了三周，对他来说，仿佛是整整一个世纪。当他终于从病床上起来的时候，回想起自己的处境是多么寂寞，无助而凄凉，虽然饶了条小命，竟也不觉得多么庆幸。他没精打采地走上街头，碰到了吉姆·荷利斯在扮演法官，这个“少年法庭”正在审判一只被控谋杀的猫，被害者——一只鸟——也在场。而乔·哈帕和哈克·费恩正在一条巷子里吃偷来的甜瓜。可怜的孩子！他们——也像汤姆一样——老毛病又犯了。





Chapter 23


第二十三章

AT last the sleepy atmosphere was stirred — and vigorously: the murder trial came on in the court. It became the absorbing topic of village talk immediately. Tom could not get away from it. Every reference to the murder sent a shudder to his heart, for his troubled conscience and fears almost persuaded him that these remarks were put forth in his hearing as "feelers"; he did not see how he could be suspected of knowing anything about the murder, but still he could not be comfortable in the midst of this gossip. It kept him in a cold shiver all the time. He took Huck to a lonely place to have a talk with him. It would be some relief to unseal his tongue for a little while; to divide his burden of distress with another sufferer. Moreover, he wanted to assure himself that Huck had remained discreet.

镇上昏昏沉沉的气氛终于被打破了——而且打破得很彻底：那起谋杀案在法庭上公开审理了。这事立即成了镇上谈论的热门话题。汤姆怎么也逃不开。每当有人提及这起谋杀案，他就心里一惊，因为不安的良心和极度的恐惧几乎使他相信，人家是故意当着他面讲的，好探探他的“口风”；尽管知道别人不可能会怀疑他和这起谋杀有关，但听了这些议论，心里还是不踏实。这让他每时每刻都战战兢兢。他把哈克拉到一个僻静处，讲了这件事。能暂时松松口风，和另一个难兄难弟分担一下烦恼，多少算是点安慰。而且，他想搞清楚哈克是否谨慎的保守秘密。

"Huck, have you ever told anybody about — that?"

“哈克，你曾经跟什么人说起过——那件事吗？”

" 'Bout what?"

“什么事情？”

"You know what."

“你知道我说的是什么。”

"Oh — 'course I haven't."

“哦——当然没说过。”

"Never a word?"

“一句也没说过吗？”

"Never a solitary word, so help me. What makes you ask?"

“一个字也没说过，我发誓。你问这个干吗？”

"Well, I was afeard."

“唉，我很害怕。”

"Why, Tom Sawyer, we wouldn't be alive two days if that got found out. You know that."

“嘿，汤姆·索亚，要是秘密泄露的话，我们连两天也活不成。这你知道。”

Tom felt more comfortable. After a pause:

汤姆觉得心里踏实多了。停了一会。

"Huck, they couldn't anybody get you to tell, could they?"

“哈克，就算他们逼你招供，你也不会说的吧？”

"Get me to tell? Why, if I wanted that half-breed devil to drownd me they could get me to tell. They ain't no different way."

“逼我招供？嘿，我要是招供了，就让我被那个混账王八蛋活活淹死。他们绝对办不到。”

"Well, that's all right, then. I reckon we're safe as long as we keep mum. But let's swear again, anyway. It's more surer."

“好吧，这样就没事了。我想只要咱们保持沉默就很安全。不管怎么说，我们再发一回誓吧。这样更牢靠些。”

"I'm agreed."

“我赞成。”

So they swore again with dread solemnities.

于是他们又非常严肃地发了一回誓。

"What is the talk around, Huck? I've heard a power of it."

“大家都在议论些什么事，哈克？我听到好多东西！”

"Talk? Well, it's just Muff Potter, Muff Potter, Muff Potter all the time. It keeps me in a sweat, constant, so's I want to hide som'ers."

“议论？嗐，还不就是莫夫·波特、莫夫·波特、莫夫·波特，没完没了。这些话听得我直冒冷汗，真想找个地方躲一躲。”

"That's just the same way they go on round me. I reckon he's a goner. Don't you feel sorry for him, sometimes?"

“我也有同感。我想他算是完了。你是不是也时不时地为他感到难过？”

"Most always — most always. He ain't no account; but then he hain't ever done anything to hurt anybody. Just fishes a little, to get money to get drunk on — and loafs around considerable; but lord, we all do that — leastways most of us — preachers and suchlike. But he's kind of good — he give me half a fish, once, when there warn't enough for two; and lots of times he's kind of stood by me when I was out of luck."

“差不多是经常——我经常这样觉得。他不是什么人物；但却从来没做过什么伤天害理的事情。不过是钓钓鱼，弄点钱来买买酒喝——虽然经常到处闲逛，可是，老天，谁没干过这些事啊——起码咱们大多数人都是这样的——连布道的人也不例外。但是他心眼挺好的——有一次，我钓的鱼不够两个人吃的，他还给了我半条鱼；还有好多次，我运气不好的时候，他都挺身帮忙。”

"Well, he's mended kites for me, Huck, and knitted hooks on to my line. I wish we could get him out of there."

“哎，哈克，他帮我修过风筝，还替我把鱼钩系到线上上。真希望我们能把他救出来。”

"My! we couldn't get him out, Tom. And besides, 'twouldn't do any good; they'd ketch him again."

“哎呀！汤姆，我们办不到的。况且，就算救出来也无济于事，他们还会再把他抓回去。”

"Yes — so they would. But I hate to hear 'em abuse him so like the dickens when he never done — that."

“是呀——他们肯定会的。可是，我讨厌听到他们骂他是魔鬼，其实他根本没干——那件事。”

"I do too, Tom. Lord, I hear 'em say he's the bloodiestlooking villain in this country, and they wonder he wasn't ever hung before."

“我也一样，汤姆。老天爷，我听到他们骂他是全国头一号恶棍，还说为什么他没早点被绞死呢。”

"Yes, they talk like that, all the time. I've heard 'em say that if he was to get free they'd lynch him."

“对，他们就是这样说的，一直都是。我还听人说，要是他被放出来，他们就用私刑结果掉他。”

"And they'd do it, too."

“他们真的会那么干。”

The boys had a long talk, but it brought them little comfort. As the twilight drew on, they found themselves hanging about the neighborhood of the little isolated jail, perhaps with an undefined hope that something would happen that might clear away their difficulties. But nothing happened; there seemed to be no angels or fairies interested in this luckless captive.

两个孩子谈了很久，可是并没有得到什么安慰。天色渐晚，他俩发现自己正在那偏僻的小牢房附近转悠，可能还抱着些许说不清的希望，希望能发生什么，帮他们排忧解难。但是，什么事也没发生；似乎没什么天使啊精灵的对这个倒霉的囚犯感兴趣。

The boys did as they had often done before — went to the cell grating and gave Potter some tobacco and matches. He was on the ground floor and there were no guards.

这两个孩子还是像从前那样——走到牢房那儿，给波特递进去一点烟叶和火柴。他被关在第一层，没有看守。

His gratitude for their gifts had always smote their consciences before — it cut deeper than ever, this time. They felt cowardly and treacherous to the last degree when Potter said:

对这些礼物，他的感激经常让他们俩良心不安——而这一次，更是像把刀似的深深刺进他们心里。当波特这样说的时候，他俩觉得自己简直是最最懦弱胆小的叛徒：

"You've been mighty good to me, boys — better'n anybody else in this town. And I don't forget it, I don't. Often I says to myself, says I, 'I used to mend all the boys' kites and things, and show 'em where the good fishin' places was, and befriend 'em what I could, and now they've all forgot old Muff when he's in trouble; but Tom don't, and Huck don't — they don't forget him,' says I, 'and I don't forget them.' Well, boys, I done an awful thing — drunk and crazy at the time — that's the only way I account for it — and now I got to swing for it, and it's right. Right, and best, too, I reckon — hope so, anyway. Well, we won't talk about that. I don't want to make you feel bad; you've befriended me. But what I want to say, is, don't you ever get drunk — then you won't ever get here. Stand a litter furder west — so — that's it; it's a prime comfort to see faces that's friendly when a body's in such a muck of trouble, and there don't none come here but yourn. Good friendly faces — good friendly faces. Git up on one another's backs and let me touch 'em. That's it. Shake hands — yourn'll come through the bars, but mine's too big. Little hands, and weak — but they've helped Muff Potter a power, and they'd help him more if they could."

“孩子们，你们对我太好了——比镇上其他人对我都好。我不会忘记的，不会的。我常常自言自语，比方说：‘我以前曾经给孩子们修理风筝和其他玩具，告诉他们什么地方钓鱼最好，尽量和他们交朋友。现在波特老头倒霉了，他们就把他给忘了；可是啊，汤姆没有，哈克也没有——只有他俩没有忘记他。’我说：‘我也不会忘记他们。’‘啊，孩子们，我干了件可怕的事情——虽然当时我喝醉了，神经错乱——我只能这么解释——现在，我要为此而被吊死，这是我活该。我想，活该，也是应该的——我反倒希望被吊死。哦，咱们不谈这事了吧。我不想让你们伤心难过，你们是我的朋友。但是，我想说的是，你们千万不能酗酒——这样，你们就不会混到这种地步了。你们再往西站一点——对——就这样。一个人遭此不幸，还能看到对他友好的脸，真是莫大的安慰啊。除了你们，再也没有人来看我了。多么友好的脸蛋——多友好啊。你们俩一个爬到另一个背上，让我摸摸你们的脸吧。就是这样。再握握手吧——你们的手可以从窗户缝中伸进来，我的手太大了。这么小的手，没多大力气——可是他们帮了莫夫·波特很大的忙。只要能做到，两肋插刀也没问题。”

Tom went home miserable, and his dreams that night were full of horrors. The next day and the day after, he hung about the courtroom, drawn by an almost irresistible impulse to go in, but forcing himself to stay out. Huck was having the same experience. They studiously avoided each other. Each wandered away, from time to time, but the same dismal fascination always brought them back presently. Tom kept his ears open when idlers sauntered out of the courtroom, but invariably heard distressing news — the toils were closing more and more relentlessly around poor Potter. At the end of the second day the village talk was to the effect that Injun Joe's evidence stood firm and unshaken, and that there was not the slightest question as to what the jury's verdict would be.

汤姆悲痛地回到家里，晚上做了很多可怕的噩梦。第二天和第三天，他被一种难以克制的冲动所驱使，在法庭外面转来转去，想闯进去，可还是强迫自己留在了外面。哈克也有同样的经历。他们故意躲着对方。时常，他们从那里走开，可是不久又都可悲地被吸引了回来。每当有凑热闹的人从法庭里出来，汤姆就竖起耳朵仔细听，但毫无例外都是些令人沮丧的消息——苦难越来越无情地向可怜的莫夫·波特逼近。第二天快结束的时候，镇上传言，印第安·乔的证据确凿无疑，陪审团的判决是明摆着的了。

Tom was out late, that night, and came to bed through the window. He was in a tremendous state of excitement. It was hours before he got to sleep. All the village flocked to the courthouse the next morning, for this was to be the great day. Both sexes were about equally represented in the packed audience. After a long wait the jury filed in and took their places; shortly afterward, Potter, pale and haggard, timid and hopeless, was brought in, with chains upon him, and seated where all the curious eyes could stare at him; no less conspicuous was Injun Joe, stolid as ever. There was another pause, and then the judge arrived and the sheriff proclaimed the opening of the court. The usual whisperings among the lawyers and gathering together of papers followed. These details and accompanying delays worked up an atmosphere of preparation that was as impressive as it was fascinating.

那天夜里，汤姆在外面待到很晚，从窗子爬进家里，上床睡觉。他处在极度兴奋状态。过了好几个小时才睡着。第二天早晨，整个镇上的人成群结队地向法院走去，因为今天将是个大日子。听众席上挤满了人，男女各占一半。等了很久，陪审团才鱼贯而入，分别就座；不一会，波特戴着手铐被押了进来，他面色苍白，形容枯槁，一副胆怯又绝望的样子，在全场好奇的目光中坐了下来。印第安·乔也同样地引人注目，无动于衷，一如往常。又过了一会，法官驾到，执法官就宣布开庭。接着，就听见律师们惯例的交头接耳和收拾文件的声音。这些细节和带来的耽搁营造了一种准备的气氛，让人印象深刻又着迷。

Now a witness was called who testified that he found Muff Potter washing in the brook, at an early hour of the morning that the murder was discovered, and that he immediately sneaked away. After some further questioning, counsel for the prosecution said:

现在，一个证人传唤上来。他作证说在谋杀案发生的那天清晨，他看见莫夫·波特在河里洗澡，并且很快就溜掉了。原告律师又进一步问了些问题，说：

"Take the witness."

“问讯证人。”

The prisoner raised his eyes for a moment, but dropped them again when his own counsel said:

犯人抬眼看了一会，然后又低下了眼睛。这时他的辩护律师说：

"I have no questions to ask him."

“我没有问题要问。”

The next witness proved the finding of the knife near the corpse. Counsel for the prosecution said:

第二个证人证明，他在被害人尸体附近发现了那把刀。原告律师说：

"Take the witness."

“问讯证人。”

"I have no questions to ask him," Potter's lawyer replied.

波特的律师回答：“我没有问题要问。”

A third witness swore he had often seen the knife in Potter's possession.

第三个证人发誓说，他常常看见波特带着那把刀。

"Take the witness."

“问讯证人。”

Counsel for Potter declined to question him. The faces of the audience began to betray annoyance. Did this attorney mean to throw away his client's life without an effort?

波特的律师拒绝向这个证人提问。听众们开面露怒色。难道这个辩护律师打算不作任何努力，就把他的当事人性命给断送掉吗？

Several witnesses deposed concerning Potter's guilty behavior when brought to the scene of the murder. They were allowed to leave the stand without being cross-questioned.

有好几个证人都作证说当波特被带到凶杀现场时，他表现得很愧疚。被告的律师没有盘问他们一句，就允许他们退出了证人席。

Every detail of the damaging circumstances that occurred in the graveyard upon that morning which all present remembered so well, was brought out by credible witnesses, but none of them were cross-examined by Potter's lawyer. The perplexity and dissatisfaction of the house expressed itself in murmurs and provoked a reproof from the bench. Counsel for the prosecution now said:

对于那天早上坟地里发生的悲剧，在场的人都记忆犹新。现在每一个细节又在证言中重现出来，却都没有受到波特的律师的盘问。人们感到既困惑又不满，小声议论着，引起了法官的一阵申斥。最后，原告律师说：

"By the oaths of citizens whose simple word is above suspicion, we have fastened this awful crime, beyond all possibility of question, upon the unhappy prisoner at the bar. We rest our case here."

“诸位公民的证词简短但是不容置疑，根据他们的誓言，我们可以确切的断定，这起可怕的谋杀案系被告席上这个不幸的犯人所为。本案取证到此结束。”

A groan escaped from poor Potter, and he put his face in his hands and rocked his body softly to and fro, while a painful silence reigned in the courtroom. Many men were moved, and many women's compassion testified itself in tears. Counsel for the defence rose and said:

可怜的波特呻吟了一声，他把脸埋在手中，身子微微颤抖。法庭被一片悲痛的沉默统治着。许多男人都动容了，女人们也掉下了同情的眼泪。这时，辩护律师站起身来，说：“

"Your honor, in our remarks at the opening of this trial, we foreshadowed our purpose to prove that our client did this fearful deed while under the influence of a blind and irresponsible delirium produced by drink. We have changed our mind. We shall not offer that plea." (Then to the clerk): "Call Thomas Sawyer!"

法官大人，早在本庭审讯之初，我一度想要证明：我的当事人当时喝了酒，在神志不清的情况下干了这件可怕的事情。现在我改变了主意。我申请撤回那篇辩护词。”然后他对书记员说：“传汤姆·索亚！”

A puzzled amazement awoke in every face in the house, not even excepting Potter's. Every eye fastened itself with wondering interest upon Tom as he rose and took his place upon the stand. The boy looked wild enough, for he was badly scared. The oath was administered.

在场的每一个人都莫名其妙，惊诧不已，就连波特也不例外。在所有疑惑的目光的注视下，汤姆站起来，走上了证人席。这孩子吓坏了，看起来有点控制不住自己。接着他宣了誓。

"Thomas Sawyer, where were you on the seventeenth of June, about the hour of midnight?"

“汤姆·索亚，6月17日大约半夜时分，你在什么地方？”

Tom glanced at Injun Joe's iron face and his tongue failed him. The audience listened breathless, but the words refused to come. After a few moments, however, the boy got a little of his strength back, and managed to put enough of it into his voice to make part of the house hear:

汤姆一眼瞥见了印第安·乔那张冷酷的脸，舌头就像打了结，顿时讲不出话来。听众们都屏息静听，可是他还是一个字也没吐出来。不过，过了一会儿，这孩子振作了一点，勉强提高了声音，但仍然只有部分人能听见他的话：

"In the graveyard!"

“在坟地！”

"A little bit louder, please. Don't be afraid. You were —"

“请你稍微大点声。别害怕。你是在……”

"In the graveyard."

“在坟地。”

A contemptuous smile flitted across Injun Joe's face.

印第安·乔的脸上闪过一丝嘲弄的微笑。

"Were you anywhere near Horse Williams' grave?"

“你是在霍斯·威廉斯的坟墓的附近吗？”

"Yes, sir."

“是的，先生。”

"Speak up — just a trifle louder. How near were you?"

“大点声——再稍微大点声。有多近？”

"Near as I am to you."

“就像我离您这么近。”

"Were you hidden, or not?"

“你是不是藏起来了？”

"I was hid."

“是藏起来了。”

"Where?"

“什么地方？”

"Behind the elms that's on the edge of the grave."

“藏在坟边的几棵榆树后面。”

Injun Joe gave a barely perceptible start.

印第安·乔暗暗吃了一惊。

"Any one with you?"

“还有别人吗？”

"Yes, sir. I went there with —"

“有，先生。我是和……”

"Wait — wait a moment. Never mind mentioning your companion's name. We will produce him at the proper time. Did you carry anything there with you?"

“别忙——等一下。先不急着提你同伴的名字。我们会在适当的时候传问他。你当时身上带着什么东西吗？”

Tom hesitated and looked confused.

汤姆犹豫着，不知所措。

"Speak out, my boy — don't be diffident. The truth is always respectable. What did you take there?"

“说出来吧，孩子——别害怕。说真话总是值得尊重的。你带了什么去的？”

"Only a — a — dead cat."

“就带了一只——呃——一只死猫。”

There was a ripple of mirth, which the court checked.

人们一阵哄笑，法官喝止住了。

"We will produce the skeleton of that cat. Now, my boy, tell us everything that occurred — tell it in your own way — don't skip anything, and don't be afraid."

“我们会出具那只死猫的残骸。现在，孩子，把发生的事情告诉大家——用你自己的方式说——什么也别漏掉，别害怕。”

Tom began — hesitatingly at first, but as he warmed up to his subject, his words flowed more and more easily; in a little while every sound ceased but his own voice; every eye fixed itself upon him; with parted lips and bated breath the audience hung upon his words, taking no note of time, rapt in the ghastly fascinations of the tale. The strain upon pent emotion reached its climax when the boy said:

汤姆开始说了——起初有些吞吞吐吐，不过他越说越起劲，话也越来越流畅；不一会儿，除了他在讲话，所有声音都停止下来，每只眼睛都注视着他。人们张着嘴，屏住呼吸，兴致盎然地听他讲着，全然忘记了时间，沉浸在这个恐怖却引人入胜的故事中。说到后来，汤姆心中积压的情感达到了顶点，他说：

"— and as the doctor fetched the board around and Muff Potter fell, Injun Joe jumped with the knife and —"

“……医生一挥那木牌，莫夫·波特就倒在地上，印第安·乔拿着刀，跳过来……”

Crash! Quick as lightning the half-breed sprang for a window, tore his way through all opposers, and was gone!

哗啦！那个杂种闪电一般朝窗口窜去，冲开所有阻挡他的人，跑了！





Chapter 24


第二十四章

TOM was a glittering hero once more — the pet of the old, the envy of the young. His name even went into immortal print, for the village paper magnified him. There were some that believed he would be President, yet, if he escaped hanging.

汤姆又一次成了耀眼的英雄——长辈们宠爱他，同伴们羡慕他。他的名字甚至变成了铅字，因为镇上的报纸大肆宣扬了他一番。有些人相信，他将来只要不是被绞死，就会当总统。

As usual, the fickle unreasoning world took Muff Potter to its bosom and fondled him as lavishly as it had abused him before. But that sort of conduct is to the world's credit; therefore it is not well to find fault with it.

那些喜怒无常、没有脑子的人们，又像往常一样，把莫夫·波特当做老伙计，对他非常亲密友好，那股热情劲儿就和当初他们起劲地凌辱他一样。但这种行为也是人之常情，所以还是不要吹毛求疵了。

Tom's days were days of splendor and exultation to him, but his nights were seasons of horror. Injun Joe infested all his dreams, and always with doom in his eye. Hardly any temptation could persuade the boy to stir abroad after nightfall. Poor Huck was in the same state of wretchedness and terror, for Tom had told the whole story to the lawyer the night before the great day of the trial, and Huck was sore afraid that his share in the business might leak out yet, notwithstanding Injun Joe's flight had saved him the suffering of testifying in the court. The poor fellow had got the attorney to promise secrecy, but what of that? Since Tom's harassed conscience had managed to drive him to the lawyer's house by night and wring a dread tale from lips that had been sealed with the dismalest and most formidable of oaths, Huck's confidence in the human race was well-nigh obliterated.

汤姆白天过得欢天喜地，神气十足，可晚上全是在恐惧之中度过的。印第安·乔和他那双凶恶的眼睛老是出现在汤姆的梦里。天黑以后，无论什么也不能引诱这个孩子出门了。可怜的哈克也处于同样的不幸与恐惧之中。汤姆在案件开庭审理的前一天晚上，已经把全部经过都告诉了律师。虽然印第安·乔的逃跑使哈克免于出庭作证，他还是极度害怕自己与这个案子有牵连的事会泄露出去。律师已经向这可怜的小家伙保证过，会保守秘密，可那又有什么用？汤姆本来已经郑重发过誓要把嘴封住，可后来还不是受良心的折磨，晚上跑去律师家，把那可怕的经历抖搂了出来。哈克对人类的信任几乎荡然无存了。

Daily Muff Potter's gratitude made Tom glad he had spoken; but nightly he wished he had sealed up his tongue.

白天，莫夫·波特的感激使汤姆很高兴自己说出了事实；可是一到晚上，他就懊悔自己没能管住舌头。

Half the time Tom was afraid Injun Joe would never be captured; the other half he was afraid he would be. He felt sure he never could draw a safe breath again until that man was dead and he had seen the corpse.

有一半时间汤姆都在害怕印第安·乔将永远逍遥法外；而另一半时间却又害怕他被捕。他深深感到，除非这个人死了，并且让他亲眼看见尸体，否则他将永无宁日。

Rewards had been offered, the country had been scoured, but no Injun Joe was found. One of those omniscient and awe-inspiring marvels, a detective, came up from St. Louis, moused around, shook his head, looked wise, and made that sort of astounding success which members of that craft usually achieve. That is to say, he "found a clew." But you can't hang a "clew" for murder, and so after that detective had got through and gone home, Tom felt just as insecure as he was before.

法院悬出赏，整个地区都搜遍了，可就是没有印第安·乔的影子。从圣路易斯来了一名神通广大、令人敬畏的侦探，四处调查，时不时摇摇脑袋，看起来颇为不凡，还声称取得了惊人的进展，就像他的同行们经常做的那样。那就是说，他“找到了线索”。但是，你总不能把“线索”当谋杀犯来绞死。所以在这位侦探完成任务回去之后，汤姆还是和从前一样没有安全感。

The slow days drifted on, and each left behind it a slightly lightened weight of apprehension.

漫长的日子一天天过去了，沉重的恐惧感也一点点减轻了。





Chapter 25


第二十五章

THERE comes a time in every rightly constructed boy's life when he has a raging desire to go somewhere and dig for hidden treasure. This desire suddenly came upon Tom one day. He sallied out to find Joe Harper, but failed of success. Next he sought Ben Rogers; he had gone fishing. Presently he stumbled upon Huck Finn the Red- Handed. Huck would answer. Tom took him to a private place and opened the matter to him confidentially. Huck was willing. Huck was always willing to take a hand in any enterprise that offered entertainment and required no capital, for he had a troublesome superabundance of that sort of time which is not money. "Where'll we dig?" said Huck.

但凡健全的男孩子，到一定时候就会有个强烈的愿望：到各地寻宝。一天，汤姆也突然萌生了这个念头。他跑出去找乔·哈帕，但没有找到。接着又去找本·罗杰斯，可是他去钓鱼去了。不久，他碰到了赤手大盗哈克·费恩。哈克应该会答应。汤姆把他拉到一个没人的地方，推心置腹地和他摊了牌。哈克欣然同意。凡是好玩的，又不需要本钱的冒险活动，哈克总是乐意掺和掺和的。他没钱，可有的是时间，正愁着没处花呢。“我们上哪儿挖去？”哈克问。

"Oh, most anywhere."

“噢，好多地方都行哪。”

"Why, is it hid all around?"

“怎么，难道到处都藏着宝贝吗？”

"No indeed it ain't. It's hid in mighty particular places, Huck — sometimes on islands, sometimes in rotten chests under the end of a limb of an old dead tree, just where the shadow falls at midnight; but mostly under the floor in ha'nted houses."

“不，当然不是。财宝埋在一些相当特殊的地方，哈克——有的埋在岛上，有的装在朽木箱子里，埋在一棵枯死的大树底下，就在半夜时分树影照到的地方；不过，大多数情况下是埋在闹鬼的房子下面。”

"Who hides it?"

“是谁埋的呢？”

"Why, robbers, of course — who'd you reckon? Sunday-school sup'rintendents?"

“嘿，当然是强盗！你想还会有谁——难道是主日学校的校长不成？”

"I don't know. If 'twas mine I wouldn't hide it; I'd spend it and have a good time."

“我不知道。换了我，我才不把它给埋起来，我会拿出去花掉，好好玩上一段时间。”

"So would I. But robbers don't do that way. They always hide it and leave it there."

“我也会的。但是，强盗们不这样干。他们总把钱埋起来，然后就不管了。”

"Don't they come after it any more?"

“之后他们不再回来找它吗？”

"No, they think they will, but they generally forget the marks, or else they die. Anyway, it lays there a long time and gets rusty; and by and by somebody finds an old yellow paper that tells how to find the marks — a paper that's got to be ciphered over about a week because it's mostly signs and hy'roglyphics."

“不，他们是想再找的。可是，他们不是忘了当初留下的标记，就是死了。总之，财宝埋在那里，时间长了，都长了锈。渐渐的，有人发现一张泛黄的纸条，上面写着如何去找那些标记——这种纸条要花上一个星期才能解密，因为上面用的差不多都是符号和象形文字。”

"Hyro-which?"

“象形——象形什么？”

"Hy'roglyphics — pictures and things, you know, that don't seem to mean anything."

“象形文字——图画之类的玩意儿，你知道，一些看上去没有任何意义的图画。”

"Have you got one of them papers, Tom?"

“你拿到那样的纸条了吗，汤姆？”

"No."

“还没有。”

"Well, then, how you going to find the marks?"

“那你打算怎么去找那些记号呢？”

"I don't want any marks. They always bury it under a ha'nted house or on an island, or under a dead tree that's got one limb sticking out. Well, we've tried Jackson's Island a little, and we can try it again some time; and there's the old ha'nted house up the Still- House branch, and there's lots of dead-limb trees — dead loads of 'em."

“我不需要什么记号。强盗们老爱把财宝埋在闹鬼的屋子里或是岛上，要不然就埋在那些有一根树枝探出来的枯树下面。哼，我们已经在杰克逊岛上找过一阵子了，以后什么时候还可以再去找找。在鬼屋河岸上，有间闹鬼的老房子，那儿还有许许多多的枯树——多得很呢。”

"Is it under all of them?"

“下面全埋着财宝吗？”

"How you talk! No!"

“瞧你说的！哪有那么多！”

"Then how you going to know which one to go for?"

“那么，你怎么知道该挖哪棵树呢？”

"Go for all of 'em!"

“所有的树下面都挖一挖。”

"Why, Tom, it'll take all summer."

“哎，汤姆，这可得挖上一整个夏天呀。”

"Well, what of that? Suppose you find a brass pot with a hundred dollars in it, all rusty and gray, or a rotten chest full of di'monds. How's that?"

“哦，那又怎么样？想想看，你挖到一个铜罐子，里面装了一百块大洋，都生了锈，变了颜色；或者挖到了一只腐烂掉的箱子，里面全是钻石。怎么样？”

Huck's eyes glowed.

哈克的眼睛亮了起来。

"That's bully. Plenty bully enough for me. Just you gimme the hundred dollars and I don't want no di'monds."

“那可真太棒了。要我说可是够好的了。你只要把那一百块大洋给我就行了，钻石我就不要了。”

"All right. But I bet you I ain't going to throw off on di'monds. Some of 'em's worth twenty dollars apiece — there ain't any, hardly, but's worth six bits or a dollar."

“好吧。不过，我跟你讲，钻石我可不会扔掉。有的钻石一颗就值二十美元——有的也不那么值钱，不过也要值六角到一块。”

"No! Is that so?"

“不是吧！真的吗？”

"Cert'nly — anybody'll tell you so. Hain't you ever seen one, Huck?"

“那当然啦——人人都这么说。你难道从来没见过钻石吗，哈克？”

"Not as I remember."

“我印象中好像没见过。”

"Oh, kings have slathers of them."

“嗨，国王有老多钻石呢。”

"Well, I don' know no kings, Tom."

“唉，我不认识什么国王呀，汤姆。”

"I reckon you don't. But if you was to go to Europe you'd see a raft of 'em hopping around."

“我想你也不认识。不过，你要是到欧洲去，就能看到一大群国王到处乱窜乱跳。”

"Do they hop?"

“他们乱窜乱跳？”

"Hop? — your granny! No!"

“什么乱窜乱跳——你这糊涂蛋！不是！”

"Well, what did you say they did for?"

“哦，那你刚才说他们做什么来着？”

"Shucks, I only meant you'd see 'em — not hopping, of course — what do they want to hop for? — but I mean you'd just see 'em — scattered around, you know, in a kind of a general way. Like that old humpbacked Richard."

“呸，我是说你会看见他们的——当然不是乱窜乱跳——他们乱窜乱跳干什么？——我只是说你会看见他们——用通俗的话说就是，到处都是，你明白吧？比方说那个驼背的理查老国王。”

"Richard? What's his other name?"

“理查？他姓什么？”

"He didn't have any other name. Kings don't have any but a given name."

”他没有什么姓。国王只有名，没有姓。”

"No?"

“没有姓？”

"But they don't."

“真的没有。”

"Well, if they like it, Tom, all right; but I don't want to be a king and have only just a given name, like a nigger. But say — where you going to dig first?"

“好吧，汤姆，要是他们喜欢这样，那就随便吧；不过，我可不想当国王，只有名字，像个黑鬼似的。得了，我问你——你打算从哪儿开始挖？”

"Well, I don't know. S'pose we tackle that old deadlimb tree on the hill t'other side of Still-House branch?"

“呃，我也不知道。你说我们先从鬼屋河岸对面小山上的那棵枯树那儿动手，怎么样？”

"I'm agreed."

“我同意。”

So they got a crippled pick and a shovel, and set out on their three-mile tramp. They arrived hot and panting, and threw themselves down in the shade of a neighboring elm to rest and have a smoke.

于是，他们找了一把破破烂烂的镐和一把铁锹，踏上了三英里的路程。到达那里的时候，俩人已是满头大汗，气喘吁吁，就往旁边的榆树阴凉下一躺，歇一歇，抽袋烟。

"I like this," said Tom.

“我喜欢干这活儿。”汤姆说。

"So do I."

“我也是。”

"Say, Huck, if we find a treasure here, what you going to do with your share?"

“我说哈克，要是我们在这儿找到了财宝，你打算怎么花你的那份呢？”

"Well, I'll have pie and a glass of soda every day, and I'll go to every circus that comes along. I bet I'll have a gay time."

“嗨，我要天天吃馅饼，喝汽水，然后我要去看马戏，场场不落。我敢说我会快活得像活神仙。”

"Well, ain't you going to save any of it?"

“嗯，不过你不打算攒点钱吗？”

"Save it? What for?"

“攒钱？干什么用？”

"Why, so as to have something to live on, by and by."

“嘿，为以后留着用，细水长流嘛。”

"Oh, that ain't any use. Pap would come back to thishyer town some day and get his claws on it if I didn't hurry up, and I tell you he'd clean it out pretty quick. What you going to do with yourn, Tom?"

“哦，那没用的。我爸迟早会回到镇上，要是我不抓紧把钱花光，他一准会手伸得老长，抢我的钱。告诉你吧，他很快就会花得一个子儿不剩。你打算怎么花你的钱呢，汤姆？”

"I'm going to buy a new drum, and a sure-'nough sword, and a red necktie and a bull pup, and get married."

“我打算买一面新鼓，一把货真价实的宝剑，一条红领带和一只小斗牛犬，还要结婚。”

"Married!"

“结婚！”

"That's it."

“是啊。”

"Tom, you — why, you ain't in your right mind."

“汤姆，你——喂，你脑子不太正常吧。”

"Wait — you'll see."

“等着瞧吧，你会明白的。”

"Well, that's the foolishest thing you could do. Look at pap and my mother. Fight! Why, they used to fight all the time. I remember, mighty well."

“唉，没有比结婚更蠢的事了。看看我爸跟我妈。打打打！唉，他们整天打架。我记得很清楚。”

"That ain't anything. The girl I'm going to marry won't fight."

”这是两码子的事。我要娶的这个女孩子可不会跟我干仗。”

"Tom, I reckon they're all alike. They'll all comb a body. Now you better think 'bout this awhile. I tell you you better. What's the name of the gal?"

“汤姆，我说她们都一样。都胡搅蛮缠。这事你最好先想想。我劝你好好想想。这个妞叫什么？”

"It ain't a gal at all — it's a girl."

“她不是什么妞——是个女孩子。”

"It's all the same, I reckon; some says gal, some says girl — both's right, like enough. Anyway, what's her name, Tom?"

“我觉得都是一回事；有人喊妞，有人喊女孩——都对，都一样。不管怎么说，她到底叫什么，汤姆？”

"I'll tell you sometime — not now."

“我以后再告诉你——现在不行。”

"All right — that'll do. Only if you get married I'll be more lonesomer than ever."

“那好吧——以后就以后吧。只是你成了家，我就更孤单了。”

"No you won't. You'll come and live with me. Now stir out of this and we'll go to digging."

“不会的。你可以搬过来，跟我们一起住。别管这些了，我们动手挖吧。”

They worked and sweated for half an hour. No result. They toiled another half hour. Still no result. Huck said:

他们大汗淋漓的干了半个小时。一无所获。又拼命地干了半个钟头。还是一无所获。哈克说：

"Do they always bury it as deep as this?"

“他们总是埋得这么深吗？”

"Sometimes — not always. Not generally. I reckon we haven't got the right place."

“有时候是的——不过不总是这样。一般来说是不会的。我想我们没找准地方。”

So they chose a new spot and began again. The labor dragged a little, but still they made progress. They pegged away in silence for some time. Finally Huck leaned on his shovel, swabbed the beaded drops from his brow with his sleeve, and said:

于是，他们又换了个新地方挖起来。虽然干得有点慢，但还是有进展的。他们默默地干了一段时间。最后，哈克倚着铁锹，用袖子抹了把额头上豆大的汗珠，说道：

"Where you going to dig next, after we get this one?"

“挖完这个，你打算再到哪里去挖呢？”

"I reckon maybe we'll tackle the old tree that's over yonder on Cardiff Hill back of the widow's."

“我想咱们也许可以去挖那边的那颗枯树，就在卡第夫山上寡妇家后面。”

"I reckon that'll be a good one. But won't the widow take it away from us, Tom? It's on her land."

“我说那地方不错。不过，那寡妇该不会把咱们挖到的财宝据为己有吧，汤姆？那可是在她家的地上呀。”

"She take it away! Maybe she'd like to try it once. Whoever finds one of these hid treasures, it belongs to him. It don't make any difference whose land it's on."

“据为己有！叫她试试看。谁找到这些宝藏就归谁。这和谁家的地没任何关系。”

That was satisfactory. The work went on. By and by Huck said:

这个解释令人满意。他们继续挖着。后来，哈克又说：

"Blame it, we must be in the wrong place again. What do you think?"

“妈的，咱们准是又挖错了地方。你看呢？”

"It is mighty curious, Huck. I don't understand it. Sometimes witches interfere. I reckon maybe that's what's the trouble now."

“这就怪了，哈克。我真搞不懂。有时候，巫婆会暗中捣鬼。我猜问题出在这儿。”

"Shucks, witches ain't got no power in the daytime."

“呸！巫婆白天是没有法力的。”

"Well, that's so. I didn't think of that. Oh, I know what the matter is! What a blamed lot of fools we are! You got to find out where the shadow of the limb falls at midnight, and that's where you dig!"

“对，这话不假。我没想到这一点。啊，我知道问题出在哪儿了！咱俩真是他妈的大傻瓜两个！你得搞清楚夜半的时候，那个树杈的影子落在什么地方，那才是我们要挖的地方啊！”

"Then confound it, we've fooled away all this work for nothing. Now hang it all, we got to come back in the night. It's an awful long way. Can you get out?"

“妈的！我俩傻乎乎地白挖了一场。真该死，咱们得半夜三更跑到这儿来。路程可不近。你能溜出来吗？”

"I bet I will. We've got to do it tonight, too, because if somebody sees these holes they'll know in a minute what's here and they'll go for it."

“我想我能出来。而且咱们今天晚上非来不可，因为要是旁人看见这些洞，他们立刻就会明白这儿有什么，然后就把宝藏挖走了。”

"Well, I'll come around and meow tonight."

“那么，我今天晚上会到你家附近学猫叫。”

"All right. Let's hide the tools in the bushes."

“好吧。咱们把工具藏到灌木丛里。”

The boys were there that night, about the appointed time. They sat in the shadow waiting. It was a lonely place, and an hour made solemn by old traditions. Spirits whispered in the rustling leaves, ghosts lurked in the murky nooks, the deep baying of a hound floated up out of the distance, an owl answered with his sepulchral note. The boys were subdued by these solemnities, and talked little. By and by they judged that twelve had come; they marked where the shadow fell, and began to dig. Their hopes commenced to rise. Their interest grew stronger, and their industry kept pace with it. The hole deepened and still deepened, but every time their hearts jumped to hear the pick strike upon something, they only suffered a new disappointment. It was only a stone or a chunk. At last Tom said:

当天晚上，两个孩子如约而来。他们坐在树荫底下等着。这是个偏僻的地方，又是半夜，那些迷信的故事给这地方抹上些阴森森的味道。树叶的沙沙声像是幽灵的窃窃私语，鬼怪埋伏在暗影里，远处飘来沉沉的狗吠，还有猫头鹰阴森地回叫着。两个孩子被这种阴沉恐怖的气氛吓住了，没怎么讲话。后来，估摸着该到12点钟了，他们就在树影垂落的地方作了记号，开始挖起来。他们的希望开始高涨。兴致越来越好，干劲也随之越来越大。坑越挖越深，每次他们听到镐碰到什么东西的声响，心都怦怦狂跳，可总免不了失望。那不过是一块石头或是一块木头。汤姆终于开口道：

"It ain't any use, Huck, we're wrong again."

“这样干还是不行，哈克，咱们又搞错了。”

"Well, but we can't be wrong. We spotted the shadder to a dot."

“哎，怎么会错呢。咱们都在树影落下的地方作了记号了啊。”

"I know it, but then there's another thing."

“我知道，不过还有一点。”

"What's that?"

“是什么？”

"Why, we only guessed at the time. Like enough it was too late or too early."

“唉，咱们只是在估摸时间。也可能太早了或太迟了。”

Huck dropped his shovel.

哈克把铁锹一扔。

"That's it," said he. "That's the very trouble. We got to give this one up. We can't ever tell the right time, and besides this kind of thing's too awful, here this time of night with witches and ghosts a-fluttering around so. I feel as if something's behind me all the time; and I'm afeard to turn around, becuz maybe there's others in front a-waiting for a chance. I been creeping all over, ever since I got here."

“对，”他说。“问题就出在这儿。咱们还是放弃吧。我们根本搞不准时间，而且这事太可怕了，半夜三更的，女巫和鬼魂四处游荡。我老觉得背后有什么东西盯着我；又不敢回头，因为说不定前面也有什么在等着找机会害咱们呢。自打来到这地方，我就浑身直起鸡皮疙瘩。”

"Well, I've been pretty much so too, Huck. They most always put in a dead man when they bury a treasure under a tree, to look out for it."

“唉，我也差不多有同感，哈克。他们在树下埋财宝的时候，通常还埋上一个死人作看守。”

"Lordy!"

“天啊！”

"Yes, they do. I've always heard that."

“是真的。我常听人家这么说。”

"Tom, I don't like to fool around much where there's dead people. A body's bound to get into trouble with 'em, sure."

“汤姆，我不喜欢在有死人的地方闲荡。否则一定会遇上麻烦的，肯定会的。”

"I don't like to stir 'em up, either. S'pose this one here was to stick his skull out and say something!"

“我也不想打扰他们。说不定这儿就会有个死人伸出脑袋，开口说话呢！”

"Don't Tom! It's awful."

“别说了，汤姆！真恐怖。”

"Well, it just is. Huck, I don't feel comfortable a bit."

“嘿，可不是。哈克，我也觉得不对劲儿。”

"Say, Tom, let's give this place up, and try somewheres else."

“喂，汤姆，咱们还是别在这儿挖了，再到的地方看看吧。”

"All right, I reckon we better."

“好吧，我也觉得最好这样。”

"What'll it be?"

“到哪儿去呢？”

Tom considered a while; and then said:

汤姆想了一会，然后说：

"The ha'nted house. That's it!"

“那间闹鬼的屋子。就是那儿！”

"Blame it, I don't like ha'nted houses, Tom. Why, they're a dern sight worse'n dead people. Dead people might talk, maybe, but they don't come sliding around in a shroud, when you ain't noticing, and peep over your shoulder all of a sudden and grit their teeth, the way a ghost does. I couldn't stand such a thing as that, Tom — nobody could."

“妈的，我也不喜欢闹鬼的屋子，汤姆。唉，那里比死人还可怕。也许死人会说话，可是他们不会趁你不注意，披着寿衣飘来飘去，然后猛地从你背后探出身来，龇牙咧嘴，就像鬼魂一贯的做法。我可受不了这个，汤姆——没人受得了。”

"Yes, but Huck, ghosts don't travel around only at night. They won't hender us from digging there in the daytime."

“是呀。不过，哈克，鬼魂只有夜里才出没。咱们白天到那儿去挖，他们就不会碍事了。”

"Well, that's so. But you know mighty well people don't go about that ha'nted house in the day nor the night."

“对，这话不错。可是你知道，不管是白天还是夜里，都没人去那间鬼屋。”

"Well, that's mostly because they don't like to go where a man's been murdered, anyway — but nothing's ever been seen around that house except in the night — just some blue lights slipping by the windows — no regular ghosts."

“噢，这大概是因为他们不喜欢到一个出过命案的地方去——可是，除了夜里，谁也没在那所房子周围看到过什么——只有些蓝光在窗户那儿飘来荡去——不是总有鬼。”

"Well, where you see one of them blue lights flickering around, Tom, you can bet there's a ghost mighty close behind it. It stands to reason. Becuz you know that they don't anybody but ghosts use 'em."

“哦，汤姆，你看到有那些蓝光闪烁的地方，后面准跟着一个鬼魂。这是有道理的，因为你知道，除了鬼怪，没人点蓝色的火。”

"Yes, that's so. But anyway they don't come around in the daytime, so what's the use of our being afeard?"

“是呀，这话没错。不过，不管怎么说，他们白天不会出来，那咱们还怕什么呢？”

"Well, all right. We'll tackle the ha'nted house if you say so — but I reckon it's taking chances."

“唉，好吧。既然你这么说，咱们就去找找那间鬼屋——不过，我想我们只是碰运气。”

They had started down the hill by this time. There in the middle of the moonlit valley below them stood the "ha'nted" house, utterly isolated, its fences gone long ago, rank weeds smothering the very doorsteps, the chimney crumbled to ruin, the window sashes vacant, a corner of the roof caved in. The boys gazed a while, half expecting to see a blue light flit past a window; then talking in a low tone, as befitted the time and the circumstances, they struck far off to the right, to give the haunted house a wide berth, and took their way homeward through the woods that adorned the rearward side of Cardiff Hill.

这时候，他们已经动身往山下走。在他们脚下是一个沐浴在月光中的山谷，“鬼屋”就孤零零地立在那里，围墙早就没有了，茂盛的杂草掩住了台阶，烟囱倒在了一片废墟中，窗框空空荡荡，屋顶一个犄角也塌掉了。两个孩子望了一会，有点期待看见蓝色的火光飘过窗口；然后他们在这个时间，这种氛围，小声说着话，尽量贴着右边，远远躲开那间鬼屋，穿过卡第夫山后的树林，一路向家走去。





Chapter 26


第二十六章

ABOUT noon the next day the boys arrived at the dead tree: they had come for their tools. Tom was impatient to go to the haunted house; Huck was measurably so, also — but suddenly said:

第二天中午的时候，这两个孩子到那棵枯树那里来拿他们的工具。汤姆等不及要到那个闹鬼的屋子去了；哈克显然也想去，不过，他突然说：

"Looky-here, Tom, do you know what day it is?"

“喂，我说汤姆，你知道今天是星期几么？”

Tom mentally ran over the days of the week, and then quickly lifted his eyes with a startled look in them —

汤姆在心里合计着日子，忽地抬起眼睛，一副惊讶的表情——

"My! I never once thought of it, Huck!"

“我的妈呀！哈克，我还没想到这一点呢！”

"Well, I didn't neither, but all at once it popped onto me that it was Friday."

“哦，我也是，只不过刚才忽然想起来今天是星期五。”

"Blame it, a body can't be too careful, Huck. We might a got into an awful scrape, tackling such a thing on a Friday."

“真该死，哈克，得仔细点才行。在星期五干这种事情，可能会卷到什么麻烦里。”

"Might! Better say we would! There's some lucky days, maybe, but Friday ain't."

“可能？应该说是一定！说不定有些日子会幸运一点，可那绝对不是星期五。”

"Any fool knows that. I don't reckon you was the first that found it out, Huck."

“这连傻瓜都知道。哈克，我想你不是第一个发现这点的。”

"Well, I never said I was, did I? And Friday ain't all, neither. I had a rotten bad dream last night — dreamt about rats."

“哼！我说过我是第一个了吗？而且还不止是星期五。昨天夜里，我做了一个糟糕透顶的梦——梦见耗子了。”

"No! Sure sign of trouble. Did they fight?"

“不是吧！一准要倒霉了。它们打架了吗？”

"No."

“没有。”

"Well, that's good, Huck. When they don't fight it's only a sign that there's trouble around, you know. All we got to do is to look mighty sharp and keep out of it. We'll drop this thing for today, and play. Do you know Robin Hood, Huck?"

“嗯，这还行，哈克。没梦见它们打架的话，只说明你周围会有些麻烦事，你知道。我们只要保持警惕，设法避开它就行了今天算了，去玩吧。哈克，你知道罗宾汉吗？”

"No. Who's Robin Hood?"

“不知道。罗宾汉是谁？”

"Why, he was one of the greatest men that was ever in England — and the best. He was a robber."

“嘿，他可是英国有史以来最伟大的人物之一，也是最好的一个。他是个强盗。”

"Cracky, I wisht I was. Who did he rob?"

“哎呀，我希望我也是。他抢谁呢？”

"Only sheriffs and bishops and rich people and kings, and suchlike. But he never bothered the poor. He loved 'em. He always divided up with 'em perfectly square."

“只抢郡长、主教、富人和国王，这之类的。但他不骚扰穷人。他爱他们。还经常把抢来的东西平分给他们。”

"Well, he must 'a' been a brick."

“嗯，他一定是个好汉。”

"I bet you he was, Huck. Oh, he was the noblest man that ever was. They ain't any such men now, I can tell you. He could lick any man in England, with one hand tied behind him; and he could take his yew bow and plug a ten-cent piece every time, a mile and a half."

“那还用说，哈克。噢，他是我所知的最高尚的人。我敢说，现在没有这样的人了。他能一只手绑在后面，把英国任何一个人打倒。他能用他那把紫杉木弓，射中一英里半开外的一角钱硬币，百发百中。”

"What's a yew bow?"

“紫杉木弓是什么？”

"I don't know. It's some kind of a bow, of course. And if he hit that dime only on the edge he would set down and cry — and curse. But we'll play Robin Hood — it's nobby fun. I'll learn you."

“搞不清。就是一种弓吧，应该。如果只是射中硬币的边，他就扔下弓箭，大哭一场——还要骂人。得了，我们来玩罗宾汉吧，好玩极了。我来教你。”

"I'm agreed."

“赞成！”

So they played Robin Hood all the afternoon, now and then casting a yearning eye down upon the haunted house and passing a remark about the morrow's prospects and possibilities there. As the sun began to sink into the west they took their way homeward athwart the long shadows of the trees and soon were buried from sight in the forests of Cardiff Hill.

他俩玩了一下午的罗宾汉游戏，时不时充满向往地朝那座闹鬼的房子看上一两眼，三言两语议论着第二天会发生的情况。太阳开始下山的时候，他俩顺着长长的树影往家走去，不久就消失在卡第夫山的树林中。

On Saturday, shortly after noon, the boys were at the dead tree again. They had a smoke and a chat in the shade, and then dug a little in their last hole, not with great hope, but merely because Tom said there were so many cases where people had given up a treasure after getting down within six inches of it, and then somebody else had come along and turned it up with a single thrust of a shovel. The thing failed this time, however, so the boys shouldered their tools and went away feeling that they had not trifled with fortune, but had fulfilled all the requirements that belong to the business of treasure hunting.

星期六中午刚过不久，两个孩子又来到那棵枯树旁。他俩先在树荫下抽了一会烟，聊了几句，然后又在最后剩下的洞里挖了几锹。他们没抱多大的希望，只是因为汤姆说有许多回，挖宝的人在离宝藏只有六寸的时候放弃了，结果让别的人一锹就给挖走了。不过，这次还是以失败告终，于是两个男孩扛起工具走了。他们认为自己没有轻视寻宝这项工作，做到了寻宝界的所有要求。

When they reached the haunted house there was something so weird and grisly about the dead silence that reigned there under the baking sun, and something so depressing about the loneliness and desolation of the place, that they were afraid, for a moment, to venture in. Then they crept to the door and took a trembling peep. They saw a weed-grown, floorless room, unplastered, an ancient fireplace, vacant windows, a ruinous staircase; and here, there, and everywhere hung ragged and abandoned cobwebs. They presently entered, softly, with quickened pulses, talking in whispers, ears alert to catch the slightest sound, and muscles tense and ready for instant retreat.

当他们到达的时候，夕阳下的鬼屋笼罩在一片死寂之中，气氛诡异可怖，还带着一点孤寂和忧伤，让人感到压抑。有那么一会儿，他们怕得不敢进去，只好哆哆嗦嗦的从门缝里偷看一眼。那是一间长了草的房间，地板塌了，墙皮剥落，里面有一个古老的壁炉，空荡荡的窗子，和一截破落不堪的楼梯，这里，那里，到处都是破破烂烂的蜘蛛网。之后他们轻手轻脚地走了进去，心跳加速，肌肉紧张，小声说着话，竖着耳朵，不放过最细小的声音，随时准备撤退。

In a little while familiarity modified their fears and they gave the place a critical and interested examination, rather admiring their own boldness, and wondering at it, too. Next they wanted to look upstairs. This was something like cutting off retreat, but they got to daring each other, and of course there could be but one result — they threw their tools into a corner and made the ascent. Up there were the same signs of decay. In one corner they found a closet that promised mystery, but the promise was a fraud — there was nothing in it. Their courage was up now and well in hand. They were about to go down and begin work when —

片刻之后，熟悉了这个地方的两人，不再那么害怕了，兴趣盎然地打量了这里一番，既惊奇又佩服自己的胆量。接着，他们想上楼看看。这可是把后路都切断了，得相互壮壮胆，不过最终，他们把手中的家伙扔到墙角就上了楼。楼上的情景与楼下的一样破落。他们发现墙角里有个壁橱，好像有点意思，结果那是个骗局——里面什么也没有。现在他们的胆子大多了，胸有成竹。正当他俩准备下楼动手时——

"Sh!" said Tom.

“嘘！”汤姆说。

"What is it?"whispered Huck, blanching with fright.

“怎么回事？”哈克脸色吓得发白，悄悄地问道。

"Sh!...There!... Hear it?"

“嘘！……那边……听见了吗？”

"Yes!...Oh, my! Let's run!"

“听见了！……哦，天啊！我们快逃吧！”

"Keep still! Don't you budge! They're coming right toward the door."

“安静！别动！他们正朝门这边过来。”

The boys stretched themselves upon the floor with their eyes to knotholes in the planking, and lay waiting, in a misery of fear.

两个孩子趴在楼板上，眼睛对着地板上的木节孔，在恐惧中等着。

"They've stopped....No — coming.... Here they are. Don't whisper another word, Huck. My goodness, I wish I was out of this!"

“他们停下了……不——又过来了……来了。哈克，别出声。天哪，我要是没遇上这事就好了！”

Two men entered. Each boy said to himself: "There's the old deaf-and-dumb Spaniard that's been about town once or twice lately — never saw t'other man before."

进来了两个男人。两个孩子都在心里想：“一个是又聋又哑的西班牙老头，最近去过一两次镇子，另一个从来没见过。”

"T'other" was a ragged, unkempt creature, with nothing very pleasant in his face. The Spaniard was wrapped in a serape; he had bushy white whiskers; long white hair flowed from under his sombrero, and he wore green goggles. When they came in, "t'other" was talking in a low voice; they sat down on the ground, facing the door, with their backs to the wall, and the speaker continued his remarks. His manner became less guarded and his words more distinct as he proceeded:

“另一个人”衣衫褴褛，蓬头垢面，脸上表情令人厌恶。西班牙老头裹着一条墨西哥花围巾，脸上长着浓密的白色络腮胡，宽边帽下面垂着长长的白发，鼻子上架一副绿眼镜。进屋后，“另一个人”低声说着什么，两人面对门，背朝墙，坐到地板上。“另一个人”继续说着。他的动作不那么戒备了，话也越来越清楚：

"No," said he, "I've thought it all over, and I don't like it. It's dangerous."

“不行，”他说，“我反复琢磨，还是不想干。这事太危险。”

"Dangerous!" grunted the "deaf-and-dumb" Spaniard — to the vast surprise of the boys. "Milksop!"

“危险！”那个又聋又哑的西班牙人咕哝着——两个孩子大吃一惊。“没出息！”

This voice made the boys gasp and quake. It was Injun Joe's! There was silence for some time. Then Joe said:

听见这声音，两个孩子倒吸一口凉气，哆嗦起来。那是印第安·乔的声音！沉默了一会，乔说：

"What's any more dangerous than that job up yonder — but nothing's come of it."

“有什么能比我们那次做的事更危险呢——可是也没什么后果。”

"That's different. Away up the river so, and not another house about. Twon't ever be known that we tried, anyway, long as we didn't succeed."

“那可不一样。那次远在河上，附近没有人家。我们只是试了试，不会有人知道，只要没真的做成。”

"Well, what's more dangerous than coming here in the daytime! — anybody would suspicion us that saw us."

“那好吧，有什么比大白天来这儿更危险呢？——谁看见都会起疑心。”

"I know that. But there warn't any other place as handy after that fool of a job. I want to quit this shanty. I wanted to yesterday, only it warn't any use trying to stir out of here, with those infernal boys playing over there on the hill right in full view."

“这我知道。可是自从那件傻事后，没有比这里更方便的地方了。我是想离开这烂房子。昨天就想走，可是那两个可恶的小子在山上玩，看得一清二楚，想溜是不可能的。”

"Those infernal boys" quaked again under the inspiration of this remark, and thought how lucky it was that they remembered it was Friday and concluded to wait a day. They wished in their hearts they had waited a year.

“那两个可恶的小子”听到这番话，他们不禁抖了一下，想到他们记起那天是星期五，决定等一天再行动，就觉得真是幸运。要是等上一年就好了，也不会碰上这事。

The two men got out some food and made a luncheon. After a long and thoughtful silence, Injun Joe said:

那两个男人拿出些吃的，吃了午饭。印第安·乔仔细沉思了许久，最后说：

"Look here, lad — you go back up the river where you belong. Wait there till you hear from me. I'll take the chances on dropping into this town just once more, for a look. We'll do that 'dangerous' job after I've spied around a little and think things look well for it. Then for Texas! We'll leg it together!"

“看这儿，伙计——你回河上游自己的地方去，等我的消息。我要找个机会再进一趟城，探探风声。等我侦查完了，觉得平安无事时，我们再去干那件‘危险的’事情。完事就到得克萨斯州去！一起去！”

This was satisfactory. Both men presently fell to yawning, and Injun Joe said:

这还差不多。两人随即打了个呵欠，印第安·乔说：

"I'm dead for sleep! It's your turn to watch."

“我困得要命！该轮到你望风了。”

He curled down in the weeds and soon began to snore. His comrade stirred him once or twice and he became quiet. Presently the watcher began to nod, his head drooped lower and lower, both men began to snore now.

他蜷着身子躺在草上，不一会儿就打起鼾来。同伴推了他一两次，他就安静了。不久望风的也打起瞌睡，头越来越低，现在俩人都呼呼大睡起来。

The boys drew a long, grateful breath. Tom whispered:

两个孩子深深地吸了口气，真是谢天谢地。汤姆低声说：

"Now's our chance — come!"

“机会来了——快点！”

Huck said:

哈克说：

"I can't — I'd die if they was to wake."

“不行，要是他们醒来，我非死不可。”

Tom urged — Huck held back. At last Tom rose slowly and softly, and started alone. But the first step he made wrung such a hideous creak from the crazy floor that he sank down almost dead with fright. He never made a second attempt. The boys lay there counting the dragging moments till it seemed to them that time must be done and eternity growing gray; and then they were grateful to note that at last the sun was setting.

汤姆催他走——哈克老是退缩。最后汤姆慢慢站起身，轻轻地一人往外走。可他一迈步，那破楼板就吱吱作响，他立即趴下了，吓得要命，再不敢乱动一下。两个孩子躺在那里一分一秒地数着时间，直到他俩觉得终于熬到了头，感谢老天，太阳快要下山了。

Now one snore ceased. Injun Joe sat up, stared around — smiled grimly upon his comrade, whose head was drooping upon his knees — stirred him up with his foot and said:

这时有一人鼾声停了。印第安·乔坐起来，朝四周张望，只见他的同伴头已经垂到膝上了。他冷笑一声，把同伴踹醒，然后说：

"Here! You're a watchman, ain't you! All right, though — nothing's happened."

“喂。你就是这样望风的！幸亏没发生什么意外。”

"My! have I been asleep?"

“天哪，我睡过去了吗？”

"Oh, partly, partly. Nearly time for us to be moving, pard. What'll we do with what little swag we've got left?"

“差不多，差不多。伙计，该开路了。剩下的那点油水怎么办？”

"I don't know — leave it here as we've always done, I reckon. No use to take it away till we start south. Six hundred and fifty in silver's something to carry."

“我不知道，要不然就把它留在这儿，像以前一样。带在身上也没用，不如等去南方的时候再拿。背着六百五十块银元可不轻快。”

"Well — all right — it won't matter to come here once more."

“好吧，反正再来一次也没什么关系。”

"No — but I'd say come in the night as we used to do — it's better."

“不，依我看咱最好像以前一样，晚上来。”

"Yes: but look here; it may be a good while before I get the right chance at that job; accidents might happen; 'tain't in such a very good place; we'll just regularly bury it — and bury it deep."

“对，不过，那件事的时机可能等要很长时间，弄不好会出差错，这地方并不绝对保险，我们干脆把它埋起来——埋得深深的。”

"Good idea," said the comrade, who walked across the room, knelt down, raised one of the rearward hearthstones and took out a bag that jingled pleasantly. He subtracted from it twenty or thirty dollars for himself and as much for Injun Joe and passed the bag to the latter, who was on his knees in the corner, now, digging with his bowie knife.

“好主意。”同伴说道。他走到屋子另一边，跪下，取下一块后面的炉边石头，随即掏出一个叮当响的袋子。他自己拿出二三十美元，又给印第安·乔拿了那么多，然后把袋子递给乔。乔正跪在角落边，用猎刀挖坑。

The boys forgot all their fears, all their miseries in an instant. With gloating eyes they watched every movement. Luck! — the splendor of it was beyond all imagination! Six hundred dollars was money enough to make half a dozen boys rich! Here was treasure hunting under the happiest auspices — there would not be any bothersome uncertainty as to where to dig. They nudged each other every moment — eloquent nudges and easily understood, for they simply meant — "Oh, but ain't you glad now we're here!"

两个孩子此刻把恐惧和煎熬全抛到九霄云外，擦亮眼睛，观察着他们的一举一动。运气！想都不敢想的好运气！六百块钱能让五六个孩子变成阔佬！这真是对寻宝活动的一笔大赞助，再也不用在发愁去哪里挖了。他俩不时用胳膊肘捅捅对方，那意思彼此心知肚明——“噢，现在你该高兴我们待在这里吧！”

Joe's knife struck upon something.

乔的刀碰到了什么东西。

"Hello!" said he.

“喂！”他说。

"What is it?"said his comrade.

“那是什么？”他的同伴问道。

"Half-rotten plank—no, it's a box, I believe. Here — bear a hand and we'll see what it's here for. Never mind, I've broke a hole."

“快要烂的木板——不，肯定是个箱子，过来，搭把手，看看有什么用。不要紧，我已经把它给弄了个洞。”

He reached his hand in and drew it out —

他伸出手把箱子里的东西拽了出来——

"Man, it's money!"

“伙计，是钱！”

The two men examined the handful of coins. They were gold. The boys above were as excited as themselves, and as delighted.

两个男人仔细端详满手的钱币。是金币。上面的两个孩子也同他们一样地激动、高兴。

Joe's comrade said:

乔的同伴说：

"We'll make quick work of this. There's an old rusty pick over amongst the weeds in the corner the other side of the fireplace — I saw it a minute ago."

“我们得快挖。我刚才看见壁炉那边拐角处的草堆中有把生锈的旧铁锹。”

He ran and brought the boys' pick and shovel. Injun Joe took the pick, looked it over critically, shook his head, muttered something to himself, and then began to use it. The box was soon unearthed. It was not very large; it was iron bound and had been very strong before the slow years had injured it. The men contemplated the treasure a while in blissful silence.

他跑过去把两个孩子的十字镐和铁锹拿了过来。印第安·乔拿起镐头，挑剔地看了一番，摇摇头，自言自语地咕哝了一两句，然后开始挖了起来。很快就挖出来了。箱子不太大，外面包着铁皮，经过岁月的侵蚀，没有以前牢固了。那两个男人不言不语，喜滋滋地对着宝箱看了一会儿。

"Pard, there's thousands of dollars here," said Injun Joe.

“伙计，箱子里有一千块钱。”印第安·乔说道。

" 'Twas always said that Murrel's gang used to be around here one summer," the stranger observed.

“以前常听说，有年夏天莫列尔那帮人来过这一带。”陌生人说。

"I know it," said Injun Joe; "and this looks like it, I should say."

“这事我知道。”印第安·乔说，“我看，这倒有点像他们的。”

"Now you won't need to do that job."

“现在你不用去干那件事啦。”

The half-breed frowned. Said he:

那个混蛋皱起眉头，说道：

"You don't know me. Least you don't know all about that thing. Tain't robbery altogether — it's revenge!" and a wicked light flamed in his eyes. "I'll need your help in it. When it's finished — then Texas. Go home to your Nance and your kids, and stand by till you hear from me."

“你不了解我。至少你不完全了解那件事。那不完全是抢劫——是复仇啊！”他眼里射出凶恶的光。“这事我需要你的帮助。干完活就到得州去。现在回家到你老婆孩子那儿去吧，等我的消息。”

"Well — if you say so; what'll we do with this — bury it again?"

“好吧——如果你这样讲的话；那这箱金币怎么办？——再埋在这里？”

"Yes. (Ravishing delight overhead.) No! by the great Sachem, no! (Profound distress overhead.) I'd nearly forgot. That pick had fresh earth on it! (The boys were sick with terror in a moment.) What business has a pick and a shovel here? What business with fresh earth on them? Who brought them here — and where are they gone? Have you heard anybody? — seen anybody? What! bury it again and leave them to come and see the ground disturbed? Not exactly — not exactly. We'll take it to my den."

“对，（楼上高兴得欢天喜地。）不！好家伙！绝对不行！（楼上的情绪一落千丈。）我差点忘了。那把镐头上还有新土呢！（两个孩子一听吓得要命。）为什么这里会有锹和镐头？为什么上面会有新土？是谁拿来的？——人呢？听见有人吗？看见了吗？好家伙，还要把箱子埋起来，让他们回来好发现这里有人动过土？不行，这样不行。我们把箱子拿到我那里去。”

"Why, of course! Might have thought of that before. You mean Number One?"

“说得对呀，干吗不呢？早该想到这主意，你是说要拿到一号去？”

"No — Number Two — under the cross. The other place is bad — too common."

“不，是二号，十字架下面的。一号不行，太普通了。”

"All right. It's nearly dark enough to start."

“好，天快黑了，可以动身了。”

Injun Joe got up and went about from window to window cautiously peeping out. Presently he said:

印第安·乔站起身来，谨慎地这个窗户看看，那个窗户瞧瞧。随即说道：

"Who could have brought those tools here? Do you reckon they can be upstairs?"

“谁会把锹和镐头拿到这里呢？你说楼上会不会有人？”

The boys' breath forsook them. Injun Joe put his hand on his knife, halted a moment, undecided, and then turned toward the stairway. The boys thought of the closet, but their strength was gone. The steps came creaking up the stairs — the intolerable distress of the situation woke the stricken resolution of the lads — they were about to spring for the closet, when there was a crash of rotten timbers and Injun Joe landed on the ground amid the debris of the ruined stairway. He gathered himself up cursing, and his comrade said:

两个孩子被吓得大气不敢喘。印第安·乔把手按在刀上，有点犹豫不决，停了一下，然后转身朝楼梯走去。孩子们想起了壁橱，可现在却一点力气都没有。脚步声吱吱嘎嘎地响着，上了楼梯，情况万分危急，两个孩子横下一条心——他俩刚准备冲到壁橱里，就听见朽木板哗的一声，印第安·乔掉到了下面烂楼梯的残骸里。他边骂边爬起来，这时他同伴说：

"Now what's the use of all that? If it's anybody, and they're up there, let them stay there — who cares? If they want to jump down, now, and get into trouble, who objects? It will be dark in fifteen minutes — and then let them follow us if they want to. I'm willing. In my opinion, whoever hove those things in here caught a sight of us and took us for ghosts or devils or something. I'll bet they're running yet."

“你这么做有什么用啊？要是有人在楼上，就让他待在上面吧，没人在乎。他们要是想现在跳下来找碴，也没人反对。一刻钟后天就黑了，愿跟就让他们跟踪好了。我不在乎。要我说，把东西扔在这里的人，要是看见了我们，一定以为我们是鬼或者恶魔什么的。我敢打赌他们早就逃跑了。”

Joe grumbled a while; then he agreed with his friend that what daylight was left ought to be economized in getting things ready for leaving. Shortly afterward they slipped out of the house in the deepening twilight, and moved toward the river with their precious box.

乔咕哝了一阵，觉得同伴说得也有道理，不如乘天黑之前，抓紧时间，收拾收拾东西好离开。随后他俩在渐沉的暮色中溜出去，带着宝贝箱子往河那边走去。

Tom and Huck rose up, weak but vastly relieved, and stared after them through the chinks between the logs of the house. Follow? Not they. They were content to reach ground again without broken necks, and take the townward track over the hill. They did not talk much. They were too much absorbed in hating themselves — hating the ill luck that made them take the spade and the pick there. But for that, Injun Joe never would have suspected. He would have hidden the silver with the gold to wait there till his "revenge" was satisfied, and then he would have had the misfortune to find that money turn up missing. Bitter, bitter luck that the tools were ever brought there!

汤姆和哈克站起来，虽然很累，但总算松了一口气，他们从房子的木条缝中盯着那两个人的背影。跟踪？他俩不行。没被扭断脖子，能重新站在地面上，已经很知足了，于是他们顺着回城的小路翻过了山。一路上谁也没多说什么。只是一个劲地埋怨自己，怪运气不好，才把那倒霉的锹和镐头带到那儿去。要不是这两样工具，印第安·乔决不会起疑心。他会把银币和金币都藏在这里，然后去报仇，等回来后发现很不幸的，东西不翼而飞了。倒霉，真是太倒霉了，怎么把工具带到那儿去了呢！

They resolved to keep a lookout for that Spaniard when he should come to town spying out for chances to do his revengeful job, and follow him to "Number Two," wherever that might be. Then a ghastly thought occurred to Tom.

他们打定主意，那个西班牙人进城打探、伺机报仇时，一定要注意观察，然后跟他到“二号”去，不管上天入地。突然，一个可怕的念头出现在汤姆的脑海里。

"Revenge? What if he means us, Huck!"

“报仇？哈克，要是他指的是我俩可怎么办？”

"Oh, don't!" said Huck, nearly fainting.

“噢，千万别。”哈克说着，差点昏过去。

They talked it all over, and as they entered town they agreed to believe that he might possibly mean somebody else — at least that he might at least mean nobody but Tom, since only Tom had testified.

他俩商量了一番，在快要进城的时候，决定就当他指的是别的什么人，最坏是指汤姆，因为只有汤姆在法庭上作过证。

Very, very small comfort it was to Tom to be alone in danger! Company would be a palpable improvement, he thought.

只有他一人面临危险，汤姆可完全完全高兴不起来。他想，要是有个同伴，多少还好一点。





Chapter 27


第二十七章

THE adventure of the day mightily tormented Tom's dreams that night. Four times he had his hands on that rich treasure and four times it wasted to nothingness in his fingers as sleep forsook him and wakefulness brought back the hard reality of his misfortune. As he lay in the early morning recalling the incidents of his great adventure, he noticed that they seemed curiously subdued and far away — somewhat as if they had happened in another world, or in a time long gone by. Then it occurred to him that the great adventure itself must be a dream! There was one very strong argument in favor of this idea — namely, that the quantity of coin he had seen was too vast to be real. He had never seen as much as fifty dollars in one mass before, and he was like all boys of his age and station in life, in that he imagined that all references to "hundreds" and "thousands" were mere fanciful forms of speech, and that no such sums really existed in the world. He never had supposed for a moment that so large a sum as a hundred dollars was to be found in actual money in anyone's possession. If his notions of hidden treasure had been analyzed, they would have been found to consist of a handful of real dimes and a bushel of vague, splendid, ungraspable dollars.

那天晚上，汤姆净做些白天历险的梦，备受折磨。有四次宝藏都到手了，可醒来之后仍是两手空空，把他带回了不幸的严酷现实。一大早，他躺在那儿，回想着自己的冒险，不知为何觉得那些事情既模糊，又遥远——有点像是发生在另一个世界，或者是在很久很久以前。他突然意识到，这次大冒险本身一定是一场梦！有力证据之一，就是那些金币太多，太不真实了。他以前从没有一下子看过五十块，和其他同年的孩子一样，认为什么几百元、几千元，不过是说说好听而已，根本不存在这么大数目的钱。他想也没想过，有哪个人会真的拥有一百美元这么大笔钱。如果分析一下，汤姆心目中宝藏的概念，只不过是一把实实在在的分币和一堆可望而不可及的钞票罢了。

But the incidents of his adventure grew sensibly sharper and clearer under the attrition of thinking them over, and so he presently found himself leaning to the impression that the thing might not have been a dream, after all. This uncertainty must be swept away. He would snatch a hurried breakfast and go and find Huck.

可是仔细想一想，冒险的事情历历在目，汤姆又倾向于认为这不是一场梦。他一定要弄个水落石出，于是三口两口吃完早饭后就去找哈克。

Huck was sitting on the gunwale of a flatboat, listlessly dangling his feet in the water and looking very melancholy. Tom concluded to let Huck lead up to the subject. If he did not do it, then the adventure would be proved to have been only a dream.

哈克正坐在一条平底船的船舷上，两只脚耷拉在水里，看上去没精打采，忧心忡忡。汤姆决定让哈克先开口谈这个问题。要是他没有提这事，那就证明上次的冒险只是场梦。

"Hello, Huck!"

“哈克，你好！”

"Hello, yourself."

“喂，你好。”

Silence, for a minute.

一阵沉默。

"Tom, if we'd 'a' left the blame tools at the dead tree, we'd 'a' got the money. Oh, ain't it awful!"

“汤姆，要是把那该死的工具放在枯树那边，我们就拿到钱了。唉，你说糟糕不糟糕！”

" 'Tain't a dream, then, 'tain't a dream! Somehow I most wish it was. Dog'd if I don't, Huck."

“这么说那不是梦喽！不知怎的，我倒希望它是。骗人是小狗，哈克。”

"What ain't a dream?"

“什么不是梦呀？”

"Oh, that thing yesterday. I been half thinking it was."

“噢，就是昨天那件事，我刚才还半信半疑的想那是不是梦。”

"Dream! If them stairs hadn't broke down you'd 'a' seen how much dream it was! I've had dreams enough all night — with that patch-eyed Spanish devil going for me all through 'em — rot him!"

“梦！要不是那楼梯倒了，你会做更多的梦！我一晚上也做了不少梦，那个独眼的西班牙鬼子一直追着我——该死的家伙！”

"No, not rot him. Find him! Track the money!"

“不不，不要咒他死，要找到活人！把钱追出来！”

"Tom, we'll never find him. A feller don't have only one chance for such a pile — and that one's lost. I'd feel mighty shaky if I was to see him, anyway."

“汤姆，我们找不到他，一个人就这么一次发大财的机会，还给错过了。不管怎么说，要是见到他，我肯定吓得哆嗦。”

"Well, so'd I; but I'd like to see him, anyway — and track him out — to his Number Two."

“嗯，我也会，不过我还是要见他，然后跟着他，直到二号。”

"Number Two — yes, that's it. I been thinking 'bout that. But I can't make nothing out of it. What do you reckon it is?"

“二号，对，就是嘛，我也在想这事，可还是理不出头绪来，你有什么想法？”

"I dono. It's too deep. Say, Huck — maybe it's the number of a house!"

“我也不知道。太难了，喂，哈克，那有可能是门牌号码吗？”

"Goody!... No, Tom, that ain't it. If it is, it ain't in this one-horse town. They ain't no numbers here."

“太对了！……不，汤姆，那不是门牌号。要是的话，也肯定不在这个巴掌大的小镇。这儿根本用不着门牌号。”

"Well, that's so. Lemme think a minute. Here — it's the number of a room — in a tavern, you know!"

“对，这话不假。让我再想想，这是房间号，是客栈里的，你知道吧。”

"Oh, that's the trick! They ain't only two taverns. We can find out quick."

“噢，你说对了！这儿只有两家客栈，很快就可以搞清楚。”

"You stay here, Huck, till I come."

“哈克，你待在这儿，等我回来。”

Tom was off at once. He did not care to have Huck's company in public places. He was gone half an hour. He found that in the best tavern, No.2 had long been occupied by a young lawyer, and was still so occupied. In the less ostentatious house No. 2 was a mystery.

汤姆立刻出去了，他不喜欢在公共场合下和哈克在一块。他去了有半个小时。发现在那家较好的客栈里，一个年轻的律师长期住在二号，现在还住着。可是那家较差的客栈，二号却是个谜。

The tavernkeeper's young son said it was kept locked all the time, and he never saw anybody go into it or come out of it except at night; he did not know any particular reason for this state of things; had had some little curiosity, but it was rather feeble; had made the most of the mystery by entertaining himself with the idea that that room was "ha'nted"; had noticed that there was a light in there the night before.

客栈老板那年轻的儿子说，二号一直锁着，除了晚上，从来没有人进出，他也不知道为什么会这样，虽然有点好奇，可也不甚关心，说是闹鬼的屋子纯粹是因为他觉得这样比较好玩，他还曾注意到前天晚上，二号里有灯光。

"That's what I've found out, Huck. I reckon that's the very No.2 we're after."

“哈克，这就是我调查的结果。我想这就是我们要找的二号。”

"I reckon it is, Tom. Now what you going to do?"

“我想是的，汤姆。你打算怎么办？”

"Lemme think."

“让我想想。”

Tom thought a long time. Then he said:

汤姆想了很久，然后说：

"I'll tell you. The back door of that No.2 is the door that comes out into that little close alley between the tavern and the old rattletrap of a brick store. Now you get hold of all the doorkeys you can find, and I'll nip all of Auntie's, and the first dark night we'll go there and try 'em. And mind you, keep a lookout for Injun Joe, because he said he was going to drop into town and spy around once more for a chance to get his revenge. If you see him, you just follow him; and if he don't go to that No.2, that ain't the place."

“听着，二号的后门通着客栈和砖场的旧马车之间的那条巷子。你去把所有能找到的门的钥匙全弄到手，我去偷姨妈的，等天一黑我们就去试试哪把能开。另外提醒你，注意印第安·乔的动静，他说过要溜回城里打探虚实，以便伺机报复。你如果看见他，就跟踪他；他要不进二号，那就不是这个地方。”

"Lordy, I don't want to foller him by myself!"

“乖乖，我可不想一个人跟着他！”

"Why, it'll be night, sure. He mightn't ever see you — and if he did, maybe he'd never think anything."

“有什么，当然是晚上去，他肯定看不见你——就是看见了，也不会多想的。”

"Well, if it's pretty dark I reckon I'll track him. I dono — I dono. I'll try."

“好，如果是天很黑的话，我就去吧，不过说不准，说不准，试试吧。”

"You bet I'll follow him, if it's dark, Huck. Why, he might 'a' found out he couldn't get his revenge, and be going right after that money."

“要是天黑的话，哈克，我准会跟着他。他也许看到复仇无望，就直接去拿钱了。”

"It's so, Tom, it's so. I'll foller him; I will, by jingoes!"

“说得对，汤姆，说得对，我去盯着他，一定去，敲定了。”

"Now you're talking! Don't you ever weaken, Huck, and I won't."

“这才是好样的！别害怕，哈克，我是不会害怕的。”





Chapter 28


第二十八章

THAT night Tom and Huck were ready for their adventure. They hung about the neighborhood of the tavern until after nine, one watching the alley at a distance and the other the tavern door. Nobody entered the alley or left it; nobody resembling the Spaniard entered or left the tavern door. The night promised to be a fair one; so Tom went home with the understanding that if a considerable degree of darkness came on, Huck was to come and "meow," whereupon he would slip out and try the keys. But the night remained clear, and Huck closed his watch and retired to bed in an empty sugar hogshead about twelve.

那天晚上汤姆和哈克为他们的冒险做好了准备。他俩在客栈周围转悠到9点，一个从老远盯着小巷子，另外一个看住客栈的门。没有人进出巷子，也没有像西班牙人的进出客栈。那天晚上不太黑，所以汤姆就回家了，并和哈克说好，如果天色变暗的话，哈克就去学猫叫，他听到后就溜出来去试钥匙。可是天一直很晴朗，哈克12点左右结束望风，到空糖桶睡觉去了。

Tuesday the boys had the same ill luck. Also Wednesday. But Thursday night promised better. Tom slipped out in good season with his aunt's old tin lantern, and a large towel to blindfold it with. He hid the lantern in Huck's sugar hogshead and the watch began. An hour before midnight the tavern closed up and its lights (the only ones thereabouts) were put out. No Spaniard had been seen. Nobody had entered or left the alley. Everything was auspicious. The blackness of darkness reigned, the perfect stillness was interrupted only by occasional mutterings of distant thunder.

星期二，两个孩子的运气还是不好。星期三也是如此。终于，星期四晚上有了起色。汤姆拿上姨妈的洋铁旧灯笼，和一条遮光用的大毛巾，乘机溜了出去。他把灯笼藏在哈克的糖桶里，开始望风。还有一个小时就到午夜，客栈关了门，连那仅有的灯光也熄灭了。西班牙人没露面，巷子里也没人走动，一切都很顺利。夜色深深，万籁俱静，只有远处偶尔传来的一两声雷声。

Tom got his lantern, lit it in the hogshead, wrapped it closely in the towel, and the two adventurers crept in the gloom toward the tavern. Huck stood sentry and Tom felt his way into the alley. Then there was a season of waiting anxiety that weighed upon Huck's spirits like a mountain. He began to wish he could see a flash from the lantern — it would frighten him, but it would at least tell him that Tom was alive yet. It seemed hours since Tom had disappeared. Surely he must have fainted; maybe he was dead; maybe his heart had burst under terror and excitement. In his uneasiness Huck found himself drawing closer and closer to the alley; fearing all sorts of dreadful things, and momentarily expecting some catastrophe to happen that would take away his breath. There was not much to take away, for he seemed only able to inhale it by thimblefuls, and his heart would soon wear itself out, the way it was beating. Suddenly there was a flash of light and Tom came tearing by him:

汤姆在糖桶里点亮灯笼，用毛巾把它紧紧包住，两个探险者便趁着夜色悄悄朝客栈走去。哈克放哨，汤姆摸进了巷子。等待带来的焦急像一座大山压在哈克心上。哪怕能看到一闪灯笼的光也好啊——虽然吓人，但至少说明汤姆还活着。他像是走了好几个小时似的。一定是昏过去了，要么就是死了，或许是心脏因为害怕和兴奋爆炸了。哈克十分不安，不知不觉中渐渐靠近了小巷，他草木皆兵，好像灾难随时都会降临，把他吓得憋过气去。不过他已经没有多少气了，他现在只能吸进一点点空气，而且心脏要是再这样跳下去，不久就会心力衰竭了。突然灯光一闪，汤姆从他身边狂奔过去。

"Run!" said he; "run for your life!"

“快逃！”他说，“快逃命！”

He needn't have repeated it; once was enough; Huck was making thirty or forty miles an hour before the repetition was uttered. The boys never stopped till they reached the shed of a deserted slaughterhouse at the lower end of the village. Just as they got within its shelter the storm burst and the rain poured down. As soon as Tom got his breath he said:

不用多说，一遍就够了，还没等汤姆重复，哈克的速度就已经达到每小时三四十里。他俩一口气跑到村头废弃的屠宰场的木棚那里才停下来。他们刚到屋檐下，就刮起了一阵暴风，接着大雨倾盆而下，汤姆一缓过气就说：

"Huck, it was awful! I tried two of the keys, just as soft as I could! but they seemed to make such a power of racket that I couldn't hardly get my breath. I was so scared. They wouldn't turn in the lock, either. Well, without noticing what I was doing, I took hold of the knob, and open comes the door! It warn't locked. I hopped in, and shook off the towel, and, great Caesar's ghost!"

“哈克，真恐怖。我试了两把钥匙，动作能多轻就多轻，可还是哗哗直响，弄得我气都喘不过来。我吓坏了。两把钥匙都转不动。后来，不知怎的我抓住了把手，结果门开了！门没锁。我跳进去，扯下灯笼上的毛巾，结果，吓死我了。”

"What! — what'd you see, Tom?"

“什么？——汤姆你看见了什么？”

"Huck, I most stepped onto Injun Joe's hand!"

“哈克，我差点踩上印第安·乔的手！”

"No!"

“不会的！”

"Yes! He was laying there, sound asleep on the floor, with his old patch on his eye and his arms spread out."

“没错！他躺在地板上，睡得很熟，眼睛上还带着那个眼罩，手臂摊开。”

"Lordy, what did you do? Did he wake up?"

“乖乖，你干了什么？他醒了吗？”

"No, never budged. Drunk, I reckon. I just grabbed that towel and started!"

“没醒，连动也没动。我猜一定是喝醉了。然后我抓起毛巾就往外跑！”

"I'd never 'a' thought of the towel, I bet!"

“我要是你的话，连毛巾都不要了。”

"Well, I would. My aunt would make me mighty sick if I lost it."

“我不行。要是丢了毛巾，姨妈会要我好看的。”

"Say, Tom, did you see that box?"

“喂，汤姆，你见到那箱子了吗！”

"Huck, I didn't wait to look around. I didn't see the box, I didn't see the cross. I didn't see anything but a bottle and a tin cup on the floor by Injun Joe; yes, and I saw two barrels and lots more bottles in the room. Don't you see, now, what's the matter with that ha'nted room?"

“哈克，我哪有时间看呢，没看到箱子，也没见到十字，除印第安·乔身边的地上有一个酒瓶和一只洋铁杯之外，别的什么也没看见。对了，还看到屋里有两只酒桶和一堆瓶子。你现在该明白了吧，那间闹鬼的房间是怎么回事？”

"How?"

“怎么？”

"Why, it's ha'nted with whisky! Maybe all the Temperance Taverns have got a ha'nted room, hey, Huck?"

“闹鬼，闹的是酒鬼！也许所有的禁酒客栈都有个闹鬼的房间，哈克，是不是？”

"Well, I reckon maybe that's so. Who'd 'a' thought such a thing? But say, Tom, now's a mighty good time to get that box, if Injun Joe's drunk."

“嗯，我想你说得对。谁会想到这样的事？可话说回来了，汤姆，印第安·乔醉了，现在正是拿箱子的好机会。”

"It is, that! You try it!"

“说的是！你去试试！”

Huck shuddered.

哈克吓得直打哆嗦。

"Well, no — I reckon not."

“得了，不——我看还是算了。”

"And I reckon not, Huck. Only one bottle alongside of Injun Joe ain't enough. If there'd been three, he'd be drunk enough and I'd do it."

“我也觉得不行，哈克，一瓶酒是醉不倒印第安·乔的。他身边要是有三个瓶子，一定醉得可以，那我就去。”

There was a long pause for reflection, and then Tom said: "

汤姆沉思了很久后才开口说：

Looky-here, Huck, less not try that thing any more till we know Injun Joe's not in there. It's too scary. Now, if we watch every night, we'll be dead sure to see him go out, some time or other, and then we'll snatch that box quicker'n lightning."

“哈克， 听着，只要印第安·乔还在那儿，我们就别试了。太吓人了。要是每天晚上都盯着点，我们肯定能看到他出来，迟早的，然后我们以迅雷不及掩耳之势，抱了箱子就跑。”

"Well, I'm agreed. I'll watch the whole night long, and I'll do it every night, too, if you'll do the other part of the job."

“行，我赞成，我可以盯一整夜，每天晚上都盯着，不过你得负责去抱箱子。”

"All right, I will. All you got to do is to trot up Hooper Street a block and meow — and if I'm asleep, you throw some gravel at the window and that'll fetch me."

“好，没问题。你只要从琥珀街上走一个街区，学声猫叫就行了。要是我睡着了，你就朝窗上扔个小石头，叫醒我。”

"Agreed, and good as wheat!"

“同意，太妙了！”

"Now, Huck, the storm's over, and I'll go home. It'll begin to be daylight in a couple of hours. You go back and watch that long, will you?"

“哈克，风暴停了，我要回家去。再过一两个小时，天就亮了，你回去盯完这段时间，行吗？”

"I said I would, Tom, and I will. I'll ha'nt that tavern every night for a year! I'll sleep all day and I'll stand watch all night."

“言出必行，汤姆，我会去的。每晚都去客栈，去一年都行。我白天睡觉，晚上盯梢。”

"That's all right. Now, where you going to sleep?"

“这就好，你打算睡在什么地方？”

"In Ben Rogers' hayloft. He lets me, and so does his pap's niggerman, Uncle Jake. I tote water for Uncle Jake whenever he wants me to, and any time I ask him he gives me a little something to eat if he can spare it. That's a mighty good nigger, Tom. He likes me, becuz I don't ever act as if I was above him. Sometimes, I've set right down and eat with him. But you needn't tell that. A body's got to do things when he's awful hungry he wouldn't want to do as a steady thing."

“本·罗杰斯家的干草棚里。他让我睡，杰克叔叔，他爸爸用的那个黑人也让我睡，杰克叔同意的时候，我就帮他提水；我问他要吃的，只要他有，就会给我的。他真是个好黑鬼，汤姆。他喜欢我，因为我对他从不摆臭架子，有时候，我还坐下来和他一起吃饭。不过不要跟别人讲。一个人饿得慌的时候，可能会做出些平时不会做的事。”

"Well, if I don't want you in the daytime, I'll let you sleep. I won't come bothering around. Any time you see something's up, in the night, just skip right around and meow."

“好，要是白天用不着你，你就睡觉，我不会来烦你。晚上一旦有情况，就赶快过来学声猫叫就行了。”





Chapter 29


第二十九章

THE first thing Tom heard on Friday morning was a glad piece of news — Judge Thatcher 's family had come back to town the night before. Both Injun Joe and the treasure sunk into secondary importance for a moment, and Becky took the chief place in the boy's interest. He saw her and they had an exhausting good time playing "hi-spy" and "gully-keeper" with a crowd of their schoolmates. The day was completed and crowned in a peculiarly satisfactory way: Becky teased her mother to appoint the next day for the long-promised and long-delayed picnic, and she consented. The child's delight was boundless; and Tom's not more moderate. The invitations were sent out before sunset, and straightway the young folks of the village were thrown into a fever of preparation and pleasurable anticipation. Tom's excitement enabled him to keep awake until a pretty late hour, and he had good hopes of hearing Huck's "meow," and of having his treasure to astonish Becky and the picnickers with, next day; but he was disappointed. No signal came that night.

早期五早上，汤姆听到的第一件事情就是条好消息：撒切尔法官一家前天晚上又回到了城里。现在印第安·乔和那份财宝变得次要了，贝基吸引了这孩子的全部兴趣。他见到了她，俩人和一群同学一起捉迷藏，玩“守沟”游戏，痛快极了。还有一件事给这天画上了一个圆满的句号：贝基缠着她妈妈第二天去野餐，她老早答应过，可一直都没有兑现。母亲同意了。贝基乐疯了，汤姆也差不到哪里去。太阳还没落山，邀请就发出去了，村里的年轻人立马投身到准备的热潮中，快乐地期待着。汤姆激动得很晚才睡着，满心希望能听见哈克的“猫”叫，好在野餐时拿出财宝，震一震贝基和参加野餐的人。但是他很失望，那天晚上根本没有任何信号。

Morning came, eventually, and by ten or eleven o'clock a giddy and rollicking company were gathered at Judge Thatcher's, and everything was ready for a start. It was not the custom for elderly people to mar picnics with their presence. The children were considered safe enough under the wings of a few young ladies of eighteen and a few young gentlemen of twenty-three or thereabouts. The old steam ferryboat was chartered for the occasion; presently the gay throng filed up the main street laden with provision baskets. Sid was sick and had to miss the fun; Mary remained at home to entertain him. The last thing Mrs. Thatcher said to Becky was:

早晨到了，10点、11点左右撒切尔法官家门口聚集了一群疯疯癫癫、闹闹哄哄的孩子们，万事俱备，就等出发。按照惯例，大人们是不参加这样的野餐的，以免扫兴。不过孩子们很安全，因为有几个18岁的姑娘和23岁左右的小伙子照顾他们。为这次野餐，他们租了一只老蒸汽渡船，欢乐的孩子们带着满满的野餐篮，排着队走上大街。希德生病了，没办法去，玛丽留在家里陪他玩。最后，撒切尔夫人对贝基说：

"You'll not get back till late. Perhaps you'd better stay all night with some of the girls that live near the ferry landing, child."

“要是很晚了就不要回家了，可以到住码头附近的女孩子家里去过一夜，孩子”

"Then I'll stay with Susy Harper, mamma."

“妈妈，那我就到苏珊·哈帕家去住。”

"Very well. And mind and behave yourself and don't be any trouble."

“行，到别人家注意点，别调皮啊！”

Presently, as they tripped along, Tom said to Becky:

稍后，路上汤姆对贝基说：

"Say — I'll tell you what we'll do. Stead of going to Joe Harper's we'll climb right up the hill and stop at the Widow Douglas'. She'll have ice cream! She has it most every day — dead loads of it. And she'll be awful glad to have us."

“喂，告诉你，不要去乔·哈帕家，我们直接去爬山，到道格拉斯寡妇家去。她有冰淇淋，几乎每天都吃——多得不得了，我们去，她一准喜欢得要命。”

"Oh, that will be fun!"

“噢，太有趣了！”

Then Becky reflected a moment and said:

贝基又想了片刻后说：

"But what will mamma say?"

“可是不知道妈妈会怎么说？”

"How'll she ever know?"

“她怎么会知道？”

The girl turned the idea over in her mind, and said reluctantly: "I reckon it's wrong — but —"

她掂量了掂量，犹豫地说：“我看这不好，不过……”

"But shucks! Your mother won't know, and so what's the harm? All she wants is that you'll be safe; and I bet you she'd 'a' said go there if she'd 'a' thought of it. I know she would!"

“不过个狗屁！你妈妈不会知道的，能有什么事呢？她只是希望你平安无事，我敢打赌要是她早想到这个地方，一定让你去那儿了。我知道她会的！”

The Widow Douglas' splendid hospitality was a tempting bait. It and Tom's persuasions presently carried the day. So it was decided to say nothing to anybody about the night's program. Presently it occurred to Tom that maybe Huck might come this very night and give the signal. The thought took a deal of the spirit out of his anticipations. Still he could not bear to give up the fun at Widow Douglas'. And why should he give it up, he reasoned — the signal did not come the night before, so why should it be any more likely to come tonight? The sure fun of the evening outweighed the uncertain treasure; and boylike, he determined to yield to the stronger inclination and not allow himself to think of the box of money another time that day.

道格拉斯寡妇的好客极具吸引力。再加上汤姆的劝说，事情就定下来。他们决定不向任何人透露晚上的计划。汤姆转念又想到，说不定哈克恰好今晚会来，发出信号。想到这，劲头顿时消了不少。不过他还是不能放弃到道格拉斯寡妇家中去玩。为什么不去呢？他合计着——昨天晚上没有信号，怎么偏偏就今晚有信号呢？财宝远在天边，玩耍近在眼前，显然后者比较有吸引力，因此他决定屈服于更强烈的渴望，这一天都不再去想宝箱的事情。

Three miles below town the ferryboat stopped at the mouth of a woody hollow and tied up. The crowd swarmed ashore and soon the forest distances and craggy heights echoed far and near with shoutings and laughter. All the different ways of getting hot and tired were gone through with, and by and by the rovers straggled back to camp fortified with responsible appetites, and then the destruction of the good things began. After the feast there was a refreshing season of rest and chat in the shade of spreading oaks. By and by somebody shouted:

渡船开出小镇三英里，在树木丛生的山谷口停了下来。孩子们一窝蜂地涌上岸，不久远处的树林，高高的峭壁，到处都回荡着叫喊声，笑声。他们把所有让人汗流浃背、筋疲力尽的游戏都玩了个遍，渐渐地，那些乱跑的小家伙零零星星回到营地，胃口倍增，把好吃的东西扫荡一空。大吃一顿之后，他们在橡树荫下一边休息，一边聊天。后来有人大喊：

"Who's ready for the cave?"

“有谁打算到洞里去玩？”

Everybody was. Bundles of candles were procured, and straightway there was a general scamper up the hill. The mouth of the cave was up the hillside — an opening shaped like a letter A. Its massive oaken door stood unbarred. Within was a small chamber, chilly as an icehouse, and walled by Nature with solid limestone that was dewy with a cold sweat. It was romantic and mysterious to stand here in the deep gloom and look out upon the green valley shining in the sun. But the impressiveness of the situation quickly wore off, and the romping began again. The moment a candle was lighted there was a general rush upon the owner of it; a struggle and a gallant defense followed, but the candle was soon knocked down or blown out, and then there was a glad clamor of laughter and a new chase. But all things have to end. By and by the procession went filing down the steep descent of the main avenue, the flickering rank of lights dimly revealing the lofty walls of rock almost to their point of junction sixty feet overhead. This main avenue was not more than eight or ten feet wide. Every few steps other lofty and still narrower crevices branched from it on either hand — for McDougal's cave was but a vast labyrinth of crooked aisles that ran into each other and out again and led nowhere. It was said that one might wander days and nights together through its intricate tangle of rifts and chasms, and never find the end of the cave; and that he might go down, and down, and still down, into the earth, and it was just the same — labyrinth underneath labyrinth, and no end to any of them. No man "knew" the cave. That was an impossible thing. Most of the young men knew a portion of it, and it was not customary to venture much beyond this known portion. Tom Sawyer knew as much of the cave as any one.

所有人。大家找出几捆蜡烛，很快，满山遍野就都是又蹦又跳的孩子们了。洞口在山坡上——形状像大写的字母Ａ。有一扇巨大的橡木门，没上门闩，进去之后是个小室，冷得像冰窖一样，墙是天然的石灰岩，上面挂着露珠，像渗出的冷汗。站在幽深的黑暗中，看着阳光下绿莹莹的山谷，是一件浪漫又充满神秘的事。不过大家很快就看厌了，又嬉闹起来，蜡烛一点亮，就有人扑上去抢，随后就是一阵你争我夺和自卫反击，要不了多久蜡烛要么被打翻，要么被吹灭，大家就哄笑一阵，又开始新的追逐。可是凡事都有个完，大部队顺着主要通道的陡坡往里走，一排闪烁的烛光昏暗地照着高耸的石壁，直到头顶上六十英尺、两壁相连的地方。这条主通道不过八到十英尺宽，每隔几步，两旁就有高耸而又狭窄的分叉口出现——因为麦克道格拉斯山洞是个纵横交错的大迷宫，不知通往何处。据说在这错综复杂的崖缝和洞穴中，可能走上几天几夜都找不到头；你可以一直，一直往里走，就算走到地底下去也一样——迷宫套着迷宫，一个也走不到头。没有人真正熟悉这个山洞。那是不可能的事情。大多数年轻人都只知道一点，好像约定俗成的一样，没人再往里面探险了。汤姆·索亚和别人一样，仅知道那么一点而已。

The procession moved along the main avenue some three-quarters of a mile, and then groups and couples began to slip aside into branch avenues, fly along the dismal corridors, and take each other by surprise at points where the corridors joined again. Parties were able to elude each other for the space of half an hour without going beyond the "known" ground.

一行人顺着主通道走了大约四分之三英里，然后就三三两两地钻进了叉道，沿着阴森的长廊狂奔一气，然后在几条长廊汇合的地方相互偷袭。小分队们可以互相躲避，半个小时都跑不出“已知”的部分。

By and by, one group after another came straggling back to the mouth of the cave, panting, hilarious, smeared from head to foot with tallow drippings, daubed with clay, and entirely delighted with the success of the day. Then they were astonished to find that they had been taking no note of time and that night was about at hand. The clanging bell had been calling for half an hour. However, this sort of close to the day's adventures was romantic and therefore satisfactory. When the ferryboat with her wild freight pushed into the stream, nobody cared sixpence for the wasted time but the captain of the craft.

渐渐地，大家一组接一组地回到洞口，喘着粗气，乐滋滋的，蜡烛油滴得从头到脚都是，满身的土，完全沉浸在这完美的一天中。这时他们吃惊地发现自己没注意时间，马上就到晚上了。钟已经噹噹地敲了半个小时。这样的方式结束一天的冒险倒也浪漫，因此大家很满意。渡船载着疯疯癫癫的“货物”驶进小河里，没有人在乎浪费了一天的时间，除了船老大。

Huck was already upon his watch when the ferryboat's lights went glinting past the wharf. He heard no noise on board, for the young people were as subdued and still as people usually are who are nearly tired to death. He wondered what boat it was, and why she did not stop at the wharf — and then he dropped her out of his mind and put his attention upon his business. The night was growing cloudy and dark. Ten o'clock came, and the noise of vehicles ceased, scattered lights began to wink out, all straggling foot passengers disappeared, the village betook itself to its slumbers and left the small watcher alone with the silence and the ghosts. Eleven o'clock came, and the tavern lights were put out; darkness everywhere, now. Huck waited what seemed a weary long time, but nothing happened. His faith was weakening. Was there any use? Was there really any use? Why not give it up and turn in?

当渡船的灯光闪过码头时，哈克已经开始盯梢了。船上没有什么动静，因为那群孩子们现在累得要命，一声不吭，一动不动。哈克有些好奇，这是条什么船，为什么不在码头靠岸？不过随后就不再想船的事，专心干自己的活。晚上起了云，天色越来越暗。10点了，车马声渐渐停止，四周的灯火开始熄灭，稀稀落落的行人也都不见了，整个村庄昏昏欲睡，只剩下这个小家伙，伴着寂静和鬼魂。11点钟，客栈也熄了灯，现在到处一片漆黑。哈克等得都乏了，可这么长时间什么都没发生。他开始动摇了，守在这里有什么用呢？真有用吗？不如回去睡觉算了。

A noise fell upon his ear. He was all attention in an instant. The alley door closed softly. He sprang to the corner of the brick store. The next moment two men brushed by him, and one seemed to have something under his arm. It must be that box! So they were going to remove the treasure. Why call Tom now? It would be absurd — the men would get away with the box and never be found again. No, he would stick to their wake and follow them; he would trust to the darkness for security from discovery. So communing with himself, Huck stepped out and glided along behind the men, catlike, with bare feet, allowing them to keep just far enough ahead not to be invisible.

突然他的耳朵捕捉到一点声音。他立即紧张起来。小巷的门轻轻关上了。他像弹簧一样冲到砖厂拐弯的地方。下一秒钟，两个男人从他身边一掠而过，其中一个腋下挟着什么东西。一定是宝箱！他们要转移财宝！现在去叫汤姆？那太傻了，这两个人很快就会带着箱子，跑得无影无踪。对，他要抓住两人的行踪，跟着他们，天这么黑，相信应该不会被发现。哈克这样合计着，溜了出去，像只猫似的，光着脚跟在那两人后头，始终保持距离不被看见。

They moved up the river street three blocks, then turned to the left up a cross street. They went straight ahead, then, until they came to the path that led up Cardiff Hill; this they took. They passed by the old Welshman's house, half way up the hill, without hesitating, and still climbed upward. Good, thought Huck, they will bury it in the old quarry. But they never stopped at the quarry. They passed on, up the summit. They plunged into the narrow path between the tall sumac bushes, and were at once hidden in the gloom. Huck closed up and shortened his distance, now, for they would never be able to see him. He trotted along a while; then slackened his pace, fearing he was gaining too fast; moved on a piece, then stopped altogether; listened; no sound; none, save that he seemed to hear the beating of his own heart. The hooting of an owl came from over the hill — ominous sound! But no footsteps. Heavens, was everything lost! He was about to spring with winged feet, when a man cleared his throat not four feet from him! Huck's heart shot into his throat, but he swallowed it again; and then he stood there shaking as if a dozen agues had taken charge of him at once, and so weak that he thought he must surely fall to the ground. He knew where he was. He knew he was within five steps of the stile leading into Widow Douglas' grounds. Very well, he thought, let them bury it there; it won't be hard to find.

他们顺着沿河的街走了三个街区，向左转上了一条十字路，径直往前走，上了那条通向卡第夫山的小路。他们经过了半山腰的威尔斯曼的老房子，没有丝毫犹豫，继续往上爬。好，哈克心里想，他们会把宝箱埋在石坑里。可那两个人没在老石坑停脚，而是继续向山顶走。他们钻进茂密的漆树从，选了条小路，一下子就消失在黑暗中。哈克跟上去，缩短了距离，因为那两人现在绝不会看见他。他小跑一阵，担心跑得太快，又放慢了脚步。又向前走了一段后，他停下来听一听，没声音：除了他咚咚的心跳声外，什么也听不到。山那边传来猫头鹰的叫声——不祥的声音！可是却没有脚步声。老天啊，难道不见了么！他正想拔脚去追，不到四英尺远的地方，有个男人清了一下嗓子！哈克的心一下子跳到嗓子眼，但他强按了下去，站在那里像打摆子似的直抖，腿一软简直要摔到地上。他知道他在什么地方。离道格拉斯寡妇家院子的台阶不到五步。很好，他想，就让他们在这里埋吧，这样不会太难找。

Now there was a voice — a very low voice — Injun Joe's:

一个声音传来，很低很低，是印第安·乔的声音：

"Damn her, maybe she's got company — there's lights, late as it is."

“他妈的，她家里还有别人——这么晚还亮着灯。”

"I can't see any."

“我没看见有灯光啊。”

This was that stranger's voice — the stranger of the haunted house. A deadly chill went to Huck's heart — this, then, was the "revenge" job! His thought was to fly. Then he remembered that the Widow Douglas had been kind to him more than once, and maybe these men were going to murder her. He wished he dared venture to warn her; but he knew he didn't dare — they might come and catch him. He thought all this and more in the moment that elapsed between the stranger's remark and Injun Joe's next — which was —

这是那个陌生人的声音——那个闹鬼的房子里的陌生人。哈克的心一阵冰凉——那么，这就是复仇！一瞬间他脑子里的念头就是快逃。但他记得道格拉斯寡妇一向待他很好，而这两个家伙说不定想谋害她。真希望自己有胆量冒险去向她报个信，可他晓得他不敢——那两个家伙可能会逮住他。这一切想法就在陌生人和印第安·乔说话的间隙飞逝即过。

"Because the bush is in your way. Now — this way — now you see, don't you?"

接着乔说：“因为树丛挡住了你的视线。这边——这下看见了吧，是不是？”

"Yes. Well, there is company there, I reckon. Better give it up."

“是的，我觉得确实有人在那儿，最好还是放弃吧。”

"Give it up, and I just leaving this country forever! Give it up and maybe never have another chance. I tell you again, as I've told you before, I don't care for her swag — you may have it. But her husband was rough on me — many times he was rough on me — and mainly he was the justice of the peace that jugged me for a vagrant. And that ain't all. It ain't a millionth part of it! He had me horsewhipped! — horsewhipped in front of the jail, like a nigger! — with all the town looking on! Horsewhipped! — do you understand? He took advantage of me and died. But I'll take it out of her."

“放弃，然后我永远离开这个国家？放弃的话，可能再也没有第二次机会了。再说一遍，我以前已经跟你说过了，我根本不稀罕她那几个小钱，你拿去得了。可她丈夫对我太刻薄了——很多次——就因为他是治安官，就说我是流氓，还不止这些，这还不到一百万分之一。他让人用马鞭抽我，就在监狱前面，像打黑人那样！当着全村人的面！挨马鞭，你懂吗？就这么死了真是便宜了他。不过我一定要从他女人这里找回来。”

"Oh, don't kill her! Don't do that!"

“啊，可别杀死她！别那么干！”

"Kill? Who said anything about killing? I would kill him if he was here; but not her. When you want to get revenge on a woman you don't kill her — bosh! you go for her looks. You slit her nostrils — you notch her ears like a sow!"

“杀人！谁说过要杀人？要是他在，我就杀了他，而不是她。想报复女人，用不着要她的命——蠢货！你只要让她毁容就行，扯开她的鼻孔，把耳朵弄个裂口，让她看上去像个猪。”

"By God, that's —"

“天哪，那可是……”

"Keep your opinion to yourself! It will be safest for you. I'll tie her to the bed. If she bleeds to death, is that my fault? I'll not cry, if she does. My friend, you'll help in this thing — for my sake — that's why you're here — I mightn't be able alone. If you flinch, I'll kill you. Do you understand that? And if I have to kill you, I'll kill her — and then I reckon nobody'll ever know much about who done this business."

“收起你的高见！这样对你最保险。我会把她绑在床上，如果她失血而死，那能怪我吗？就算她死了，我也不会落泪的。老兄，这事你得帮我——看在我的面子上——这是你来这儿的原因——我一个人干不了。你要是收手不干，我就宰了你，明白吗？要是非得杀了你，那我也要杀了那个女人——这样一来，我想没有人会知道这是谁干的。”

"Well, if it's got to be done, let's get at it. The quicker the better — I'm all in a shiver."

“好吧，如果非要做的话，那这就去做吧。越快越好，我现在浑身发抖。”

"Do it now? And company there? Look here — I'll get suspicious of you, first thing you know. No — we'll wait till the lights are out — there's no hurry."

“现在下手？还有外人在也不怕？听着，我开始怀疑你了。得等灯灭了才能动手——用不着这样急。”

Huck felt that a silence was going to ensue — a thing still more awful than any amount of murderous talk; so he held his breath and stepped gingerly back; planted his foot carefully and firmly, after balancing, one-legged, in a precarious way and almost toppling over, first on one side and then on the other. He took another step back, with the same elaboration and the same risks; then another and another, and — a twig snapped under his foot! His breath stopped and he listened. There was no sound — the stillness was perfect. His gratitude was measureless. Now he turned in his tracks, between the walls of sumac bushes — turned himself as carefully as if he were a ship — and then stepped quickly but cautiously along. When he emerged at the quarry he felt secure, and so he picked up his nimble heels and flew. Down, down he sped, till he reached the Welshman's. He banged at the door, and presently the heads of the old man and his two stalwart sons were thrust from windows.

哈克感到了随后而来的一阵沉默，比任何关于杀人的话还要可怕。他屏住呼吸，小心翼翼往后退，抬起一条腿，左歪右斜，差一点就栽倒，险象环生。平衡之后，再把脚小心又稳当地落下来。接着以同样的方式，冒着同样的危险，他又向后退了一步，左脚，右脚，左——一根小树枝被啪的一声踩断了！他憋住气，听了听。没有响声——绝对的安静。谢天谢地！现在他退回到了小路上，夹在两堵墙似的漆树中间，小心的转过身，好像一艘船在调头——然后迅速又谨慎地往回走去。到了石坑那里，他终于觉得安全了，拔腿就跑，一路飞奔。跑啊，跑啊，直到威尔斯曼家才停下来。他砰砰地敲门，接着老人和他那两个健壮的儿子从窗户里探出头。

"What's the row there? Who's banging? What do you want?"

“怎么搞的？是谁在敲门？你想干什么？”

"Let me in — quick! I'll tell everything."

“让我进去——快点！我会全告诉你们。”

"Why, who are you?"

“嗯？你是谁”

"Huckleberry Finn — quick, let me in!"

“哈克贝利·费恩——快点，让我进去！”

"Huckleberry Finn, indeed! It ain't a name to open many doors, I judge! But let him in, lads, and let's see what's the trouble."

“确实是哈克贝利·费恩。冲你这名字，不会有多少人愿意开门的。不过，孩子们，让他进来，看看发生了什么事。”

"Please don't ever tell I told you," were Huck's first words when he got in. "Please don't — I'd be killed, sure — but the widow's been good friends to me sometimes, and I want to tell — I will tell if you'll promise you won't ever say it was me."

“请千万别说是我讲的，”哈克进门就说，“求求你了，否则我一定会没命的。不过那寡妇常常像朋友一样待我，所以我要讲出来——您要答应我永远不会对人说是我讲的。”

"By George, he has got something to tell, or he wouldn't act so!" exclaimed the old man. "Out with it and nobody here'll ever tell, lad."

“哎呀，他确实有事情要讲，否则不会这样的！”老人大声说，“孩子，说出来吧，这儿没人会讲出去的。”

Three minutes later the old man and his sons, well armed, were up the hill, and just entering the sumac path on tiptoe, their weapons in their hands. Huck accompanied them no further. He hid behind a great boulder and fell to listening. There was a lagging, anxious silence, and then all of a sudden there was an explosion of firearms and a cry.

三分钟后，老人和他的儿子全副武装上了山。他们踮着脚进入了那条漆树小路，手里握着武器。哈克没再跟着往前去。他躲在一块大圆石后面，静静地听着。一阵漫长、令人焦躁的沉默后，突然传来了枪声和喊声。

Huck waited for no particulars. He sprang away and sped down the hill as fast as his legs could carry him.

哈克也管不了那么多细节了，跳起来冲下山坡，能跑多快跑多快。





Chapter 30


第三十章

AS the earliest suspicion of dawn appeared on Sunday morning, Huck came groping up the hill and rapped gently at the old Welshman's door. The inmates were asleep, but it was a sleep that was set on a hair trigger, on account of the exciting episode of the night. A call came from a window:

星期天早上，天刚蒙蒙亮，哈克就摸上山，轻轻敲响了老威尔斯曼家的门。里面的人还在睡觉，不过由于夜里惊险的一幕，大家睡得都很浅。窗户里传来一句问话：

"Who's there?"

“是谁呀？”

Huck's scared voice answered in a low tone:

哈克用惊魂未定的声音低声答道：

"Please let me in! It's only Huck Finn!"

“请让我进去吧！是哈克·费恩呀！”

"It's a name that can open this door night or day, lad!— and welcome!"

“这里的大门白天黑夜都为这个名字敞开！孩子，欢迎！”

These were strange words to the vagabond boy's ears, and the pleasantest he had ever heard. He could not recollect that the closing word had ever been applied in his case before. The door was quickly unlocked, and he entered. Huck was given a seat and the old man and his brace of tall sons speedily dressed themselves.

这样的话对这个流浪儿来说，很陌生，却是有生以来听到的最让他开心的话。他想不起来以前有谁曾对他说过“欢迎”。门锁很快打开了，他走了进去。哈克坐了下来，老人和他两个大高个孩子迅速穿好衣服。

"Now, my boy, I hope you're good and hungry, because breakfast will be ready as soon as the sun's up, and we'll have a piping hot one, too — make yourself easy about that! I and the boys hoped you'd turn up and stop here last night."

“喂，孩子，我希望你是带着一副好胃口来的，太阳一出来，早饭就好了，咱们可以热腾腾得吃上一顿，不用客气！我和孩子们还希望你昨天到我的家过夜呢。”

"I was awful scared," said Huck, "and I run. I took out when the pistols went off, and I didn't stop for three mile. I've come now becuz I wanted to know about it, you know; and I come before daylight becuz I didn't want to run across them devils, even if they was dead."

“我吓得不得了，”哈克说，“然后就跑了，枪一响我就跑了，一气跑了三英里才停下。我回来是想问问情况，你知道，天没亮就来是怕碰上那两个恶鬼，就算他们已经死了。”

"Well, poor chap, you do look as if you'd had a hard night of it — but there's a bed here for you when you've had your breakfast. No, they ain't dead, lad — we are sorry enough for that. You see we knew right where to put our hands on them, by your description; so we crept along on tiptoe till we got within fifteen feet of them — dark as a cellar that sumac path was — and just then I found I was going to sneeze. It was the meanest kind of luck! I tried to keep it back, but no use — 'twas bound to come, and it did come! I was in the lead with my pistol raised, and when the sneeze started those scoundrels a-rustling to get out of the path, I sung out, 'Fire boys!' and blazed away at the place where the rustling was. So did the boys. But they were off in a jiffy, those villains, and we after them, down through the woods. I judge we never touched them. They fired a shot apiece as they started, but their bullets whizzed by and didn't do us any harm. As soon as we lost the sound of their feet we quit chasing, and went down and stirred up the constables. They got a posse together, and went off to guard the riverbank, and as soon as it is light the sheriff and a gang are going to beat up the woods. My boys will be with them presently. I wish we had some sort of description of those rascals — 'twould help a good deal. But you couldn't see what they were like, in the dark, lad, I suppose?"

“嗯，可怜虫，看来你昨天晚上一定很不好过——这里有张床，吃完早饭后你可以睡上一觉。那两个家伙还没死，孩子，我们很抱歉。你瞧，按照你的描述，我们知道在哪儿抓住他们，就踮着脚悄悄往那儿走，直到离他们十五英尺的地方——那漆树丛黑的像个地窖——而这时我觉得要打喷嚏。真是倒霉透了！我试着憋住，可是没用，就是想打，结果就打出来了！我是端着枪走在头里的，喷嚏惊动了那两个坏蛋，他们唰地一声钻出小路，我大声喊，‘孩子们，开火！’然后对着沙沙响的地方放了一阵子枪。孩子们也开了枪。可那两个坏蛋瞬间就溜了，然后我们追着进了树林。我想我们根本没打着他们。开始的时候他们也开了枪，不过子弹嗖嗖地擦过去，没有伤着我们。直到听不见他们的脚步声了，我们就停下来，下山去叫醒了警官。警官调集了一队人马，守在河岸上，然后天一亮，警长就带一帮人到森林去搜查。我的两个儿子过会儿也要跟他们一起去。如果我们知道那两个恶棍的模样，会有很大帮助。可是我想天那么黑，你也看不清他们的长相吧，孩子？”

"Oh, yes; I saw them downtown and follered them."

“不，我在镇上见过他俩，还跟踪过他们。”

"Splendid! Describe them — describe them, my boy!"

“太棒了！说说看——说说看，孩子！”

"One's the old deaf-and-dumb Spaniard that's been around here once or twice, and t'other's a meanlooking, ragged —"

“一个是又聋又哑的西班牙人，来过这里一两次，另外一个长相猥琐，穿着破烂——”

"That's enough, lad, we know the men! Happened on them in the woods back of the widow's one day, and they slunk away. Off with you, boys, and tell the sheriff — get your breakfast tomorrow morning!"

“孩子，这就够了，我们认识那两个家伙。有一次在寡妇家后面的树林中碰到过，他们溜掉了。快去吧，孩子们，告诉警长——今天早饭就先别吃了！”

The Welshman's sons departed at once. As they were leaving the room Huck sprang up and exclaimed:

威尔斯曼的两个孩子立即出发了。他们刚要走出屋子，哈克跳起来，大声说道：

"Oh, please don't tell anybody it was me that blowed on them! Oh, please!"

“喂，请千万别告诉任何人是我走漏的风声！求求你们了！”

"All right if you say it, Huck, but you ought to have the credit of what you did."

“好吧，哈克，如果你这样说的话，不过这是你应得的荣誉啊！”

"Oh, no, no! Please don't tell!"

“不不不，请不要讲！”

When the young men were gone, the old Welshman said:

两个年轻人走后，威尔斯曼老人说：

"They won't tell — and I won't. But why don't you want it known?"

“他们不会说出去，我也不会的。可你为什么不愿让人知道呢？”

Huck would not explain, further than to say that he already knew too much about one of those men and would not have the man know that he knew anything against him for the whole world — he would be killed for knowing it, sure.

哈克没有多做解释，只是说他知道其中一人的底细，而且无论如何也不想让那人知道这事，否则他肯定会没命的。

The old man promised secrecy once more, and said:

老人再次表示会保守秘密，说道：

"How did you come to follow these fellows, lad? Were they looking suspicious?"

“孩子，你怎么会跟踪他俩呢？是不是他们看起来很可疑？”

Huck was silent while he framed a duly cautious reply. Then he said:

哈克没作声，正在精心构思一个合理的回答。然后他说：

"Well, you see, I'm a kind of a hard lot — least everybody says so, and I don't see nothing agin it — and sometimes I can't sleep much, on account of thinking about it and sort of trying to strike out a new way of doing. That was the way of it last night. I couldn't sleep, and so I come along up street 'bout midnight, a-turning it all over, and when I got to that old shackly brick store by the Temperance Tavern, I backed up agin the wall to have another think. Well, just then along comes these two chaps slipping along close by me, with something under their arm and I reckoned they'd stole it. One was a-smoking, and t'other one wanted a light; so they stopped right before me and the cigars lit up their faces and I see that the big one was the deaf-and-dumb Spaniard, by his white whiskers and the patch on his eye, and t'other one was a rusty, ragged-looking devil."

“您瞧，我是个坏家伙——至少大伙是这么说的，我也没什么意见——不过有时候我会睡不好觉，想着这个问题，怎么改邪归正之类的。昨天晚上就是这样。我睡不着，半夜到街上溜达溜达，琢磨着这件事，当走到禁酒客栈旁边的老砖厂时，就靠到墙上接着想。嘿，恰好那时两个家伙悄悄从我身边溜过，腋下夹着东西，我想一定是偷来的。一个家伙抽着烟，另外一个要借个火。他俩就在我前边停下来，雪茄的火光照亮了他们的脸。我看见那个大个儿是又聋又哑的西班牙人，白胡子，眼睛上戴着眼罩，另外一个是个衣着破烂的坏蛋。”

"Could you see the rags by the light of the cigars?"

“雪茄的火光能让你看清他的衣服吗？”

This staggered Huck for a moment. Then he said:

这可难住了哈克。过了片刻，他又说：

"Well, I don't know — but somehow it seems as if I did."

“嗯，这不太清楚——不过我好像是看清了。”

"Then they went on, and you —"

“然后他们继续往前走，而你——”

"Follered 'em — yes. That was it. I wanted to see what was up — they sneaked along so. I dogged 'em to the widder's stile, and stood in the dark and heard the ragged one beg for the widder, and the Spaniard swear he'd spile her looks just as I told you and your two —"

“对，跟在他们后面，是这样的，我想知道会发生什么事——他们那样偷偷摸摸的。我一直跟到寡妇家院子的台阶那里，藏在黑暗里，听见破衣服在替寡妇求情，可西班牙佬发誓要破她的相，就像我告诉您和您那两个……”

"What! The deaf-and-dumb man said all that!"

“什么，那个又聋又哑的西班牙人说了这些！”

Huck had made another terrible mistake! He was trying his best to keep the old man from getting the faintest hint of who the Spaniard might be, and yet his tongue seemed determined to get him into trouble in spite of all he could do. He made several efforts to creep out of his scrape, but the old man's eye was upon him and he made blunder after blunder. Presently the Welshman said:

哈克又犯了一个大错误！他很努力的尽量不让老人听出来那西班牙人到底是谁，可是不管怎么做，那条舌头似乎执意要给他添麻烦。他几次试着摆脱窘境，可老人的目光弄得他一个错接一个错。随后威尔斯曼说：

"My boy, don't be afraid of me. I wouldn't hurt a hair of your head for all the world. No — I'd protect you — I'd protect you. This Spaniard is not deaf and dumb; you've let that slip without intending it; you can't cover that up now. You know something about that Spaniard that you want to keep dark. Now trust me — tell me what it is, and trust me — I won't betray you."

“孩子，别怕我。无论如何我也不会伤害你一根头发。相反，我会保护你。这个西班牙人既不聋也不哑，你无意中说漏了嘴，不可能再隐瞒了。你了解他的一些情况，只是不想说。相信我——告诉我吧！请相信我——我不会出卖你的。”

Huck looked into the old man's honest eyes a moment, then bent over and whispered in his ear:

哈克看着老人那双真诚的眼睛，过了片刻，弯过身去，低声耳语道：

"'Tain't a Spaniard — it's Injun Joe!"

“那不是西班牙人，是印第安·乔！”

The Welshman almost jumped out of his chair. In a moment he said:

威尔斯曼几乎从椅子上跳起来。片刻后他说：

"It's all plain enough, now. When you talked about notching ears and slitting noses I judged that that was your own embellishment, because white men don't take that sort of revenge. But an Injun! That's a different matter altogether."

“现在事情全明白了。你说撕开鼻子，把耳朵弄个缺口什么的，我还以为是你自己编的，因为白人们不会这样报仇。可是印第安·乔！那就完全不同了。”

During breakfast the talk went on, and in the course of it the old man said that the last thing which he and his sons had done, before going to bed, was to get a lantern and examine the stile and its vicinity for marks of blood. They found none, but captured a bulky bundle of —

谈话在早饭的时候继续着，其间老人说，他和儿子们在睡觉前做的最后一件事情，就是提着灯，检查台阶附近有没有血迹。血迹倒是没有，不过找到了一大捆——

"Of what?"

“一捆什么？”

If the words had been lightning they could not have leaped with a more stunning suddenness from Huck's blanched lips. His eyes were staring wide, now, and his breath suspended — waiting for the answer. The Welshman started — stared in return — three seconds — five seconds — ten — then replied:

哈克脱口而出，嘴唇发白，就是闪电也不能比这几个字来得更突然。他瞪着大眼，摒住呼吸，等待老人的回答。威尔斯曼吃了一惊——回瞪着哈克——三秒——五秒——十秒——然后答道：

"Of burglar's tools. Why, what's the matter with you?"

“一捆强盗的工具。你怎么回事？”

Huck sank back, panting gently, but deeply, unutterably grateful. The Welshman eyed him gravely, curiously — and presently said:

哈克向后一靠，微微喘着气，说不出的如释重负。威尔斯曼看着他，严肃又不解，然后说：

"Yes, burglar's tools. That appears to relieve you a good deal. But what did give you that turn? What were you expecting we'd found?"

“是啊，强盗的工具。你好像松了一大口气。为什么你脸色突然变了？你以为我们找到了什么？”

Huck was in a close place — the inquiring eye was upon him — he would have given anything for material for a plausible answer — nothing suggested itself — the inquiring eye was boring deeper and deeper — a senseless reply offered — there was no time to weigh it, so at a venture he uttered it — feebly:

哈克被逼到了悬崖边上——老人用询问的眼光盯着他——他愿用任何东西来换一个能站住脚的答复——可是没有什么好主意自告奋勇——那询问的眼光越钻越深——一个不太靠谱的回答冒了出来——没时间再斟酌了，于是抱着试一试的想法，他怯生生的咕哝着：

"Sunday-school books, maybe."

“主日学校用的教材，也许是的。”

Poor Huck was too distressed to smile, but the old man laughed loudly and joyously, shook up the details of his anatomy from head to foot, and ended by saying that such a laugh was money in a man's pocket, because it cut down the doctor's bills like everything. Then he added:

可怜的哈克难受得连微笑都挤不出来，可老人却哈哈大笑，浑身上下、从头到脚都在抖，最后，还说这种大笑就等于到手的钱，因为笑口常开就不用把钱送给大夫了。他接着补充道：

"Poor old chap, you're white and jaded — you ain't well a bit — no wonder you're a little flighty and off your balance. But you'll come out of it. Rest and sleep will fetch you out all right, I hope."

“可怜的小伙子，你脸色发白，又这么疲倦，看起来不太好，难怪会有点发飘，站不稳。不过你会好起来的。休息休息，睡睡觉就好了，我想。”

Huck was irritated to think he had been such a goose and betrayed such a suspicious excitement, for he had dropped the idea that the parcel brought from the tavern was the treasure, as soon as he had heard the talk at the widow's stile. He had only thought it was not the treasure, however — he had not known that it wasn't — and so the suggestion of a captured bundle was too much for his self-possession. But on the whole he felt glad the little episode had happened, for now he knew beyond all question that that bundle was not the bundle, and so his mind was at rest and exceedingly comfortable. In fact, everything seemed to be drifting just in the right direction, now; the treasure must be still in No.2, the men would be captured and jailed that day, and he and Tom could seize the gold that night without any trouble or any fear of interruption.

哈克十分恼火，自己怎么像只笨鹅一样，激动得差点露出马脚来呢？明明听到那两个家伙在寡妇家台阶前的对话后，他就觉得那个从客栈带出来的包裹并不是财宝了。不过，他只是猜测那不是财宝——可他并不晓得那确实不是——所以一提起找到了一捆东西，他就沉不住气了。整体来说，哈克还是挺高兴有这么个小插曲的，因为现在他毫无疑问的地道了“这捆”不是“那捆”，心里放松下来，舒服极了。实际上，所有事情看起来都在朝正确的方向发展。那财宝一定还在二号，而那两个家伙会被捉住，关到牢里去，然后他和汤姆当天晚上就可以弄到那些金子，不费吹灰之力，也不用担心会有人来打搅。

Just as breakfast was completed there was a knock at the door. Huck jumped for a hiding place, for he had no mind to be connected even remotely with the late event. The Welshman admitted several ladies and gentlemen, among them the Widow Douglas, and noticed that groups of citizens were climbing up the hill — to stare at the stile. So the news had spread. The Welshman had to tell the story of the night to the visitors. The widow's gratitude for her preservation was outspoken.

早饭刚吃完，就有人来敲门。哈克跳起来就躲，他完全不想和昨晚的事情扯上一点点关系。威尔斯曼让几个女士和绅士进了门，道格拉斯寡妇也在其中。他还看见有一群人正在往山上爬——去看看那台阶。原来事情已经传开了。威尔斯曼只好把晚上的情形向客人们讲了一遍。寡妇逃过一劫，表达了她的感激之情。

"Don't say a word about it, madam. There's another that you're more beholden to than you are to me and my boys, maybe, but he don't allow me to tell his name. We wouldn't have been there but for him."

“夫人，别提这事了，本来，有一个人比我和我的孩子们更值得你感谢，不过他不让我说出他的名字。要不是他，我们也不会到那里去。”

Of course this excited a curiosity so vast that it almost belittled the main matter — but the Welshman allowed it to eat into the vitals of his visitors, and through them be transmitted to the whole town, for he refused to part with his secret. When all else had been learned, the widow said:

当然，这一下子吊起了大家的胃口，主要的事情反而显得无关紧要了，但是威尔斯曼只让大家把这事记到心里，再传给全镇的人，就是不肯泄露秘密。知道了一切之后，寡妇说：

"I went to sleep reading in bed and slept straight through all that noise. Why didn't you come and wake me?"

“我在床上看书，准备睡觉，虽然外面吵吵闹闹我却一下子就睡着了。为什么你们不来把我叫醒呢？”

"We judged it warn't worth while. Those fellows warn't likely to come again — they hadn't any tools left to work with, and what was the use of waking you up and scaring you to death? My three Negro men stood guard at your house all the rest of the night. They've just come back."

“我们觉得没有那个必要，那些家伙不太可能再回来——他们没了作案工具。何必把你叫醒，吓个半死呢？晚上剩下的时间，我派了三个黑奴守着你的房子。他们刚刚回来。”

More visitors came, and the story had to be told and retold for a couple of hours more.

来的人越来越多，故事讲了又讲，两个多小时才完。

There was no Sabbath school during day-school vacation, but everybody was early at church. The stirring event was well canvassed. News came that not a sign of the two villains had been yet discovered. When the sermon was finished, Judge Thatcher's wife dropped alongside of Mrs. Harper as she moved down the aisle with the crowd and said:

学校放假的时候，主日学校也不上课，可是大家一大早就到教堂了，热烈讨论着那桩话题新闻。有消息说，还没有发现那两个坏蛋的踪影。布道结束后，法官撒切尔的夫人来到哈帕夫人身边，一边随着人群走出过道，一边说：

"Is my Becky going to sleep all day? I just expected she would be tired to death."

“我家贝基睡了一整天吗？我以为她只是累得要命。”

"Your Becky?"

“你家的贝基？”

"Yes," with a startled look — "didn't she stay with you last night?"

“对呀，”法官太太看上去很吃惊，“昨晚她不是和你住在一起的吗？”

"Why, no."

“怎么，没有啊。”

Mrs.Thatcher turned pale, and sank into a pew, just as Aunt Polly, talking briskly with a friend, passed by. Aunt Polly said:

撒切尔太太脸色苍白，瘫坐到一把椅子里。这时波莉姨妈正愉快地和朋友聊着天，走了过去。波莉姨妈说：

"Good morning, Mrs. Thatcher. Good morning, Mrs. Harper. I've got a boy that's turned up missing. I reckon my Tom stayed at your house last night — one of you. And now he's afraid to come to church. I've got to settle with him."

“早晨好，撒切尔太太，早晨好，哈帕太太，我家那个鬼小子人不见了。我猜我那个汤姆昨晚住在你们家——不知是哪一家。他现在不敢来教堂做礼拜。我得和他算账。”

Mrs. Thatcher shook her head feebly and turned paler than ever.

撒切尔太太有气无力地摇了摇头，脸色更白了。

"He didn't stay with us," said Mrs. Harper, beginning to look uneasy. A marked anxiety came into Aunt Polly's face.

“他没和我们一起。”哈帕太太说着，开始有些不安了。波莉姨妈脸上明显地露出了焦虑的神色。

"Joe Harper, have you seen my Tom this morning?"

“乔·哈帕，你早上看到我家汤姆了吗？”

"No'm."

“没有，大婶。”

"When did you see him last?"

“你什么时候最后见过他？”

Joe tried to remember, but was not sure he could say. The people had stopped moving out of church. Whispers passed along, and a boding uneasiness took possession of every countenance. Children were anxiously questioned, and young teachers. They all said they had not noticed whether Tom and Becky were on board the ferryboat on the homeward trip; it was dark; no one thought of inquiring if anyone was missing. One young man finally blurted out his fear that they were still in the cave! Mrs. Thatcher swooned away. Aunt Polly fell to crying and wringing her hands.

乔竭力回想，可是说不准。往教堂外走的人们停了下来。人群窃窃私语着，不祥的焦虑爬上了大家的脸庞。大人们迫不及待地询问孩子们和老师们。他们都说没注意汤姆和贝基是不是上了回程的船；当时天黑了，没人想到问一问有谁丢了。有个年轻人说出了他的担心：他们不会还在山洞里吧！撒切尔夫人晕了过去，波莉姨妈绞着双手哭起来。

The alarm swept from lip to lip, from group to group, from street to street, and within five minutes the bells were wildly clanging and the whole town was up! The Cardiff Hill episode sank into instant insignificance, the burglars were forgotten, horses were saddled, skiffs were manned, the ferryboat ordered out, and before the horror was half an hour old, two hundred men were pouring down highroad and river toward the cave.

警报一传十，十传百，不到五分钟的工夫，钟声疯了似的当当地响着，全镇的人都行动起来。卡第夫山事件立刻变得不重要了，盗贼的事也被抛到脑后。大家套上马，小船坐上人，渡船领令出发，消息传出不到半个小时，二百多个人就浩浩荡荡地从水路和陆路向山洞进发了。

All the long afternoon the village seemed empty and dead. Many women visited Aunt Polly and Mrs.Thatcher and tried to comfort them. They cried with them, too, and that was still better than words. All the tedious night the town waited for news; but when the morning dawned at last, all the word that came was, "Send more candles — and send food." Mrs. Thatcher was almost crazed; and Aunt Polly, also. Judge Thatcher sent messages of hope and encouragement from the cave, but they conveyed no real cheer.

整个下午，村子像空了一样，一片沉寂。许多妇女都去看望波莉姨妈和撒切尔夫人，想安慰安慰她俩。结果她们也一起哭起来，这比什么样的话都顶用。整个漫长的夜晚，小镇都在等着消息；但是当黎明最后来临时，传来的话都是：“再送些蜡烛去——送些吃的。”撒切尔夫人几乎精神失常，波莉姨妈也是。撒切尔法官从洞中派人送来些充满希望和鼓励的消息，可这些并不能让大家真正开心起来。

The old Welshman came home toward daylight, spattered with candle grease, smeared with clay, and almost worn out. He found Huck still in the bed that had been provided for him, and delirious with fever. The physicians were all at the cave, so the Widow Douglas came and took charge of the patient. She said she would do her best by him, because, whether he was good, bad, or indifferent, he was the Lord's, and nothing that was the Lord's was a thing to be neglected. The Welshman said Huck had good spots in him, and the widow said:

天快亮时老威尔斯曼才回到家，身上滴得都是蜡烛油，蒙着一层土，精疲力竭。他发现哈克还躺在给他准备的那张床上，烧得神志不清。医生们都在山洞里，因此道格拉斯寡妇来负责照看他。她说她一定会尽全力，因为不论哈克是好是坏，或者不好不坏，他都属于上帝，上帝的任何东西都不应该被忽视。威尔斯曼说哈克有他的闪光点，寡妇说：

"You can depend on it. That's the Lord's mark. He don't leave it off. He never does. Puts it somewhere on every creature that comes from His hands."

“的确如此，那是上帝的印记，上帝不会忘记的。他从来不会。在他创造的每一个生灵身上，都有这样的印记。”

Early in the forenoon parties of jaded men began to straggle into the village, but the strongest of the citizens continued searching. All the news that could be gained was that remotenesses of the cavern were being ransacked that had never been visited before; that every corner and crevice was going to be thoroughly searched; that wherever one wandered through the maze of passages, lights were to be seen flitting hither and thither in the distance, and shoutings and pistolshots sent their hollow reverberations to the ear down the sombre aisles. In one place, far from the section usually traversed by tourists, the names "Becky & Tom" had been found traced upon the rocky wall with candle smoke, and near at hand a grease-soiled bit of ribbon. Mrs. Thatcher recognized the ribbon and cried over it. She said it was the last relic she should ever have of her child; and that no other memorial of her could ever be so precious, because this one parted latest from the living body before the awful death came. Some said that now and then, in the cave, a far-away speck of light would glimmer, and then a glorious shout would burst forth and a score of men go trooping down the echoing aisle — and then a sickening disappointment always followed; the children were not there; it was only a searcher's light.

还没到下午，就有三三两两的人拖着疲惫的身体回到村里，身强力壮的还在山洞里搜索。所有传来的消息只是说，山洞里最远的地方，那些从来没有人去过的地方，都已经搜到了，接下来每一个角落，每一处裂隙都会彻底地搜一遍，在这个通道交织成的迷宫里，只要能走人的地方，老远就能看见灯光摇曳，喊声、枪声在阴森的通道里回荡着。在一个很少有游客去的地方，人们发现石壁上有用蜡烛的烟熏出来的“贝基和汤姆”两个名字，不远处还有一截油乎乎的发带。撒切尔夫人认出这是贝基的东西，痛哭流涕。她说这是她女儿留给她的最后一点遗物，再也没有什么别的纪念物比这更宝贵，因为当那可怕的死亡降临时，这件东西最后离开了她的孩子。有人说时不时地洞穴的深处会有微光闪动，接着就是一阵大喊大叫声，有一二十个男人排着队钻进回声的通道——结果照例是空欢喜一场，孩子并不在那里，只是搜救人员的灯光。

Three dreadful days and nights dragged their tedious hours along, and the village sank into a hopeless stupor. No one had heart for anything. The accidental discovery, just made, that the proprietor of the Temperance Tavern kept liquor on his premises, scarcely fluttered the public pulse, tremendous as the fact was. In a lucid interval, Huck feebly led up to the subject of taverns, and finally asked — dimly dreading the worst — if anything had been discovered at the Temperance Tavern since he had been ill.

担惊受怕得熬过了漫长的三天三夜，整个村子陷入了绝望和不知所措中。大家都没有心情做事。就连禁酒客栈的老板私自藏酒这桩意外的发现，都不能激起大家的兴头，虽然事情本身很严重。哈克清醒的时候，会有意无意地把话题扯到客栈上，最后问道——隐约害怕最坏的事情发生——他生病期间，在禁酒客栈里找到了什么。

"Yes," said the widow.

“是啊。”寡妇道。

Huck started up in bed, wild-eyed:

哈克吃惊地从床上坐起来，瞪大了眼睛。

"What? What was it?"

“是什么？找到了什么东西？”

"Liquor! — and the place has been shut up. Lie down, child — what a turn you did give me!"

“是酒啊！——现在那地方被查封了。躺下来，孩子——你吓了我一大跳！”

"Only tell me just one thing — only just one — please! Was it Tom Sawyer that found it?"

“就告诉我一件事——就一件事，求您了！那是汤姆·索亚发现的吗？”

The widow burst into tears. "Hush, hush, child, hush! I've told you before, you must not talk. You are very, very sick!"

寡妇突然哭起来。“安静点，安静点，孩子，安静点！我早就跟你说过了，不要讲话，你现在病得很厉害！”

Then nothing but liquor had been found; there would have been a great powwow if it had been the gold. So the treasure was gone forever — gone forever! But what could she be crying about? Curious that she should cry.

这么说除酒之外，没发现别的东西。要是找到的是黄金的话，大家准会大谈特谈。所以那财宝是永远找不到了——永远找不到了！可是她为什么会哭呢？真奇怪她居然哭了。

These thoughts worked their dim way through Huck's mind, and under the weariness they gave him he fell asleep. The widow said to herself:

哈克迷迷糊糊地想着这些，弄得十分疲倦，就睡着了。寡妇自言自语道：

"There — he's asleep, poor wreck. Tom Sawyer find it! Pity but somebody could find Tom Sawyer! Ah, there ain't many left, now, that's got hope enough, or strength enough, either, to go on searching."

“唉，他终于睡了，可怜的孩子。汤姆·索亚找到了财宝！可遗憾的是没人能找到汤姆·索亚！现在，已经没剩几个人还抱有希望或有力气继续搜查了。”





Chapter 31


第三十一章

NOW to return to Tom and Becky's share in the picnic. They tripped along the murky aisles with the rest of the company, visiting the familiar wonders of the cave — wonders dubbed with rather overdescriptive names, such as "The Drawing Room," "The Cathedral," "Aladdin's Palace," and so on. Presently the hide-and-seek frolicking began, and Tom and Becky engaged in it with zeal until the exertion began to grow a trifle wearisome; then they wandered down a sinuous avenue holding their candles aloft and reading the tangled webwork of names, dates, post-office addresses, and mottoes with which the rocky walls had been frescoed (in candle smoke). Still drifting along and talking, they scarcely noticed that they were now in a part of the cave whose walls were not frescoed. They smoked their own names under an overhanging shelf and moved on. Presently they came to a place where a little stream of water, trickling over a ledge and carrying a limestone sediment with it, had, in the slow-dragging ages, formed a laced and ruffled Niagara in gleaming and imperishable stone. Tom squeezed his small body behind it in order to illuminate it for Becky's gratification. He found that it curtained a sort of steep natural stairway which was enclosed between narrow walls, and at once the ambition to be a discoverer seized him. Becky responded to his call, and they made a smoke mark for future guidance, and started upon their quest. They wound this way and that, far down into the secret depths of the cave, made another mark, and branched off in search of novelties to tell the upper world about. In one place they found a spacious cavern, from whose ceiling depended a multitude of shining stalactites of the length and circumference of a man's leg; they walked all about it, wondering and admiring, and presently left it by one of the numerous passages that opened into it. This shortly brought them to a bewitching spring, whose basin was encrusted with a frostwork of glittering crystals; it was in the midst of a cavern whose walls were supported by many fantastic pillars which had been formed by the joining of great stalactites and stalagmites together, the result of the ceaseless water-drip of centuries. Under the roof vast knots of bats had packed themselves together, thousands in a bunch; the lights disturbed the creatures and they came flocking down by hundreds, squeaking and darting furiously at the candles. Tom knew their ways and the danger of this sort of conduct. He seized Becky's hand and hurried her into the first corridor that offered; and none too soon, for a bat struck Becky's light out with its wing while she was passing out of the cavern. The bats chased the children a good distance; but the fugitives plunged into every new passage that offered, and at last got rid of the perilous things. Tom found a subterranean lake, shortly, which stretched its dim length away until its shape was lost in the shadows. He wanted to explore its borders, but concluded that it would be best to sit down and rest a while, first. Now, for the first time, the deep stillness of the place laid a clammy hand upon the spirits of the children. Becky said:

现在再回来说说汤姆和贝基野餐的情况。他们跟其他伙伴一起穿行在黑暗的通道里，游览那些熟悉的洞中奇观——名字都有些夸大其词，比如“画厅”、“大教堂”、“阿拉丁宫殿”等等。之后，捉迷藏游戏开始了，汤姆和贝基对此投入了极大热情，直到有点厌倦了为止；然后他俩顺着一条弯曲的小路往里面逛，举着蜡烛看石壁上那些互相交叠成网的名字、年月、通讯地址和格言之类的东西，这些都是像壁画一样用蜡烛烟油熏在石壁上的。边走边谈，两个人完全没发觉自己已经置身在山洞的另一个区域里了，石墙没有被画上东西。他俩在一块突出的岩石上面熏上自己名字，继续往前走。不久就来到一个地方，巨大的岩层上，一股细流，夹带着石灰石的沉淀，涓涓而下，在漫长的岁月中，在闪着微光、亘古不变的石头上，形成了一线活泼的小尼亚加拉瀑布。汤姆把他小小的身体挤到后边，好照亮瀑布，让贝基看个够，结果发现水帘后面藏着一条陡峭的天然台阶，夹在两面石墙间的缝隙中。当个探险家的野心一下子抓住了汤姆。贝基响应号召，于是两人熏了个记号，以后指路用，就开始了他们的探险。他们这边绕绕，那边转转，深入到了从没有人去过的深处，又作了个记号，然后走进了一个叉道，看看有什么新鲜的东西能和上面的人吹吹牛。在一处，他们发现了一个宽敞的石窟，洞顶上垂下来一些有腿那么长短粗细的钟乳石，两人整个转了一圈，又是惊诧又是赞叹，然后从通到这个石窟的无数小路中选了一条，离开了这里。走了不远，这条小路就将他们引到了一处令人着迷的泉水旁。池壁上铺满了霜花般玲珑剔透的石子，泉水位于石窟中央，大钟乳石和大石笋连接在一起，形成了许多奇特的柱子，支撑着四周的墙壁，而这是千万年来水滴不息的结果。石窟顶上，成群结队的蝙蝠挤在一起，每一群都要几千只。结果烛光打搅了这些小生物，数以百计的蝙蝠尖叫着飞下来，愤怒地向着蜡烛扑去。汤姆了解这些蝙蝠，也知道它们这种行为的危险性。于是拉住贝基的手，赶快钻到最近的一个通道里。说时迟那时快，就在贝基刚出石窟的时候，一只蝙蝠的翅膀把她的蜡烛给扑灭了。蝙蝠把孩子们追出老远，两个逃亡者见到新的通道就钻，终于甩掉了那些危险的东西。不久，汤姆又发现了一个地下湖。湖水在黑暗中铺展开来，直到消失在暗影中。他本想探一探湖的边界，不过想了想还是先坐下来歇会儿比较好。这时，有生以来第一次，这里深深的寂静让两个孩子觉得好像有只冰冷的手攥住了他们的灵魂。贝基说：

"Why, I didn't notice, but it seems ever so long since I heard any of the others."

“对了，我都没注意，好像很长时间都没听到别人的声音了。”

"Come to think, Becky, we are away down below them — and I don't know how far away north, or south, or east, or whichever it is. We couldn't hear them here."

“想想吧，贝基，我们在他们下面很远的地方，我也不知道是在北边、南边、东边，还是什么别的方向。我们在这儿听不到他们。”

Becky grew apprehensive.

贝基担心起来。

"I wonder how long we've been down here, Tom. We better start back."

“也不知道我们在这里待了多久了，汤姆，最好还是往回走吧！”

"Yes, I reckon we better. P'raps we better."

“对，我也是这样想的，也许还是回去的好。”

"Can you find the way, Tom? It's all a mixed-up crookedness to me."

“你能找着路吗，汤姆？在我看起来都是弯弯曲曲一团糟。”

"I reckon I could find it — but then the bats. If they put both our candles out it will be an awful fix. Let's try some other way, so as not to go through there."

“我想我认识路——可是那些蝙蝠很讨厌。要是它们把我俩的蜡烛都扑灭了，那就糟了。要不试试别的路，这样就不用走那个地方了。”

"Well. But I hope we won't get lost. It would be so awful!" and the girl shuddered at the thought of the dreadful possibilities.

“行是行，不过但愿我们不要迷路。那才是糟了！”小姑娘一想到前途未卜，不禁打了个寒颤。

They started through a corridor, and traversed it in silence a long way, glancing at each new opening, to see if there was anything familiar about the look of it; but they were all strange. Every time Tom made an examination, Becky would watch his face for an encouraging sign, and he would say cheerily:

他们从一条长廊出发，沿着不声不响地走了老远，每个新出口都要看一看有什么眼熟的地方，可是都很陌生。每次汤姆仔细查看的时候，贝基都会望望他的脸上否有希望，而汤姆总是愉快地说：

"Oh, it's all right. This ain't the one, but we'll come to it right away!"

“噢，没什么大不了的，不是这个，不过我们马上就会找到出口的。”

But he felt less and less hopeful with each failure, and presently began to turn off into diverging avenues at sheer random, in desperate hope of finding the one that was wanted. He still said it was "all right," but there was such a leaden dread at his heart that the words had lost their ring and sounded just as if he had said, "All is lost!" Becky clung to his side in an anguish of fear, and tried hard to keep back the tears, but they would come. At last she said:

可是每一次的失败都让汤姆觉得希望越来越渺茫，之后他随便见到什么岔路就钻，孤注一掷，希望能找到那个出口。他嘴上说着“没什么大不了的”，但心情却十分沉重，话也不那么可信了，听上去好像说得是“没救了！”贝基极度害怕，紧跟在汤姆身旁，竭力想忍住眼泪，可眼泪还是流了出来。终于，她说：

"Oh, Tom, never mind the bats, let's go back that way! We seem to get worse and worse off all the time."

“汤姆，别管那些蝙蝠了，还回到那条路上去吧！看样子越来越不对劲了。”

Tom stopped.

汤姆停住脚步。

"Listen!" said he.

“听！”他说。

Profound silence; silence so deep that even their breathings were conspicuous in the hush. Tom shouted. The call went echoing down the empty aisles and died out in the distance in a faint sound that resembled a ripple of mocking laughter.

一片寂静，静得连他们的呼吸声都那么明显。汤姆大喊一声。喊声回荡在空空的通道里，消散在远处，那隐约的回声就像是阵阵嘲笑。

"Oh, don't do it again, Tom, it is too horrid," said Becky.

“喂，别这样，汤姆，怪吓人的。”贝基说。

"It is horrid, but I better, Becky; they might hear us, you know," and he shouted again.

“是吓人，但我最好还是喊，贝基，说不准他们能听见我们，你知道。”说完他又大喊起来。

The "might" was even a chillier horror than the ghostly laughter, it so confessed a perishing hope. The children stood still and listened; but there was no result. Tom turned upon the back track at once, and hurried his steps. It was but a little while before a certain indecision in his manner revealed another fearful fact to Becky — he could not find his way back!

“说不准”三个字比那鬼一样的笑声更让人不寒而栗，这说明了希望正在破灭。两个孩子一动不动地听着，可是没有回答。汤姆立即按原路返回，加快了脚步。过了不久，汤姆举棋不定的样子让贝基意识到另一个可怕的现实——汤姆找不到回去的路了！

"Oh, Tom, you didn't make any marks!"

“喂，汤姆，你怎么什么记号也没做！”

"Becky, I was such a fool! Such a fool! I never thought we might want to come back! No — I can't find the way. It's all mixed up."

“贝基，我真笨！一个大笨蛋！我压根没想到我们还会回来！是的，我找不到路了。全都乱套了。”

"Tom, Tom, we're lost! we're lost! We never can get out of this awful place! Oh, why did we ever leave the others!"

“汤姆，汤姆，我们迷路了！迷路！我们永远也走不出这个鬼地方了！唉，当初干吗要离开大家呢！”

She sank to the ground and burst into such a frenzy of crying that Tom was appalled with the idea that she might die, or lose her reason. He sat down by her and put his arms around her; she buried her face in his bosom, she clung to him, she poured out her terrors, her unavailing regrets, and the far echoes turned them all to jeering laughter. Tom begged her to pluck up hope again, and she said she could not. He fell to blaming and abusing himself for getting her into this miserable situation; this had a better effect. She said she would try to hope again, she would get up and follow wherever he might lead if only he would not talk like that any more. For he was no more to blame than she, she said.

她瘫在地上，突然大哭起来，汤姆吓坏了，以为她快要死了，要不然就是疯了。他在旁边坐下来，搂着贝基，贝基则把脸贴在汤姆怀里，紧紧地挨着他，一古脑把她的恐惧、徒劳的悔恨都说了出来，远处的回声就像嘲笑声一样。汤姆求她再打起精神来，可她说做不到。于是汤姆开始埋怨、咒骂自己，不该把她弄到这困境中。这倒起了点效果。她说她会努力抱定希望，只要汤姆不再说这种话，她愿意起身跟着汤姆走，到任何地方。因为她自己也同样有错。

So they moved on again — aimlessly — simply at random — all they could do was to move, keep moving. For a little while, hope made a show of reviving — not with any reason to back it, but only because it is its nature to revive when the spring has not been taken out of it by age and familiarity with failure.

于是他俩又继续往前走，漫无目的、随意的走——他们现在能做的就是往前走，不断地往前走。不久，希望又开始慢慢复苏——没什么根据，只是因为希望总会回来，只要它的源泉还没有被岁月和不断的失败带走。

By and by Tom took Becky's candle and blew it out. This economy meant so much! Words were not needed. Becky understood, and her hope died again. She knew that Tom had a whole candle and three or four pieces in his pockets — yet he must economize.

过了一会儿，汤姆拿过贝基的蜡烛，吹灭了它。这种节约意味深长，不需要解释，贝基明白其中的含义，她的希望又破灭了。她知道汤姆口袋里还有一根整蜡烛和三四个蜡烛头——但他必须节约。

By and by, fatigue began to assert its claims; the children tried to pay no attention, for it was dreadful to think of sitting down when time was grown to be so precious, moving, in some direction, in any direction, was at least progress and might bear fruit; but to sit down was to invite death and shorten its pursuit.

又过了一会，疲劳开始冒出头来，可两个孩子尽力不去在意，因为时间是如此宝贵，连坐下休息的念头都不敢想。走，向着某个方向，甚至向着任何方向都是前进，都可能会有结果，但是坐下无异于邀请死神来得快些。

At last Becky's frail limbs refused to carry her farther. She sat down. Tom rested with her, and they talked of home, and the friends there, and the comfortable beds and, above all, the light! Becky cried, and Tom tried to think of some way of comforting her, but all his encouragements were grown threadbare with use, and sounded like sarcasms. Fatigue bore so heavily upon Becky that she drowsed off to sleep. Tom was grateful. He sat looking into her drawn face and saw it grow smooth and natural under the influence of pleasant dreams; and by and by a smile dawned and rested there. The peaceful face reflected somewhat of peace and healing into his own spirit, and his thoughts wandered away to bygone times and dreamy memories. While he was deep in his musings, Becky woke up with a breezy little laugh — but it was stricken dead upon her lips, and a groan followed it.

最后，贝基柔弱的双腿再也支撑不住了。她坐了下来，汤姆和她一起休息。他们谈到了家、那里的朋友、家里舒服的床，更重要的是，灯光！贝基哭起来，汤姆试着想办法安慰她，可是他所有鼓励的话都那么老套，听起来倒像是挖苦。疲乏感越加沉重，贝基渐渐睡着了。汤姆松了一口气。他坐在那里，看着贝基熟睡的脸庞，在甜蜜的梦中，她的表情变得舒展、自然起来，笑容也慢慢地露出来。那平静的脸庞似乎给汤姆的心灵也带来了些安宁和慰藉，带他徜徉在过去的时光和梦一般的回忆里。正在他陷入沉思时，贝基在一阵爽快的笑声中醒来——可是那笑容戛然而止，接着就是一阵呻吟。

"Oh, how could! I sleep! I wish I never, never had waked! No! No, I don't, Tom! Don't look so! I won't say it again."

“唉，怎么会这样！我居然睡着了！要是我没醒过来该有多好啊！不！不！汤姆，别这样看着我！我不会再说这样的话了。”

"I'm glad you've slept, Becky; you'll feel rested, now, and we'll find the way out."

“贝基，我很高兴你睡了一觉；你休息好了，我们会找到出去的路的。”

"We can try, Tom; but I've seen such a beautiful country in my dream. I reckon we are going there."

“我们可以试试，汤姆。可我在梦中见到了一个非常美丽的国家，我想我们正在往那儿走。”

"Maybe not, maybe not. Cheer up, Becky, and let's go on trying."

“不会的，不不会的。打起精神来，贝基！我们再试一试。”

They rose up and wandered along, hand in hand and hopeless. They tried to estimate how long they had been in the cave, but all they knew was that it seemed days and weeks, and yet it was plain that this could not be, for their candles were not gone yet. A long time after this — they could not tell how long — Tom said they must go softly and listen for dripping water — they must find a spring. They found one presently, and Tom said it was time to rest again. Both were cruelly tired, yet Becky said she thought she could go on a little farther. She was surprised to hear Tom dissent. She could not understand it. They sat down, and Tom fastened his candle to the wall in front of them with some clay. Thought was soon busy; nothing was said for some time. Then Becky broke the silence:

他们站起身向前走去，手拉着手，可是心里很没底。他俩试着计算在洞里待了多久，只知道像是过了许多天，或是几个星期，不过很明显这是不可能的，因为蜡烛还没有用完。又过了很长一段时间——他们也说不准有多久——汤姆说他们必须轻轻地走路，听听哪儿有滴水声——一定要找到泉水。不久，他们果真找到了一处，汤姆说这回该休息休息了。两人累得够呛，不过贝基却说她还能再走一段。让贝基大吃一惊的是，汤姆不同意。贝基想不通。他们坐下来，汤姆用黏土把蜡烛粘在前面的石壁上。有一段时间，两人都忙着想心事，谁也没说一句话。还是贝基打破了沉默：

"Tom, I am so hungry!"

“汤姆，我很饿！”

Tom took something out of his pocket.

汤姆从口袋里掏出点什么东西。

"Do you remember this?" said he.

“还记得这个吗？”他问贝基。

Becky almost smiled.

她几乎笑起来。

"It's our wedding cake, Tom."

“是我们的结婚蛋糕，汤姆。”

"Yes — I wish it was as big as a barrel, for it's all we've got."

“答对了，我希望它有桶那么大，不过现在就只有这点了。”

"I saved it from the picnic for us to dream on, Tom, the way grown-up people do with wedding cake — but it'll be our —"

“这是我野餐的时候留下的，做个想头，汤姆，大人们也是这样做的——不过这将是我俩的——”

She dropped the sentence where it was. Tom divided the cake and Becky ate with good appetite, while Tom nibbled at his moiety. There was abundance of cold water to finish the feast with. By and by Becky suggested that they move on again. Tom was silent a moment. Then he said:

她说到这儿停了下来。汤姆把蛋糕分开，贝基胃口很好地大吃着，而汤姆却一点一点地啃着他那份。这儿倒是有足够的凉水可喝，来结束这顿“宴席”。这时贝基又建议继续往前走。汤姆沉默了一会，然后说：

"Becky, can you bear it if I tell you something?"

“贝基，如果我告诉你一件事，你受得了吗？”

Becky's face paled, but she thought she could.

贝基的脸色发白，但她觉得自己受得了。

"Well, then, Becky, we must stay here, where there's water to drink. That little piece is our last candle!"

“是这样的，贝基，我们必须待在这里，因为这里有水喝。这一小截是我们最后的蜡烛了！”

Becky gave loose to tears and wailings. Tom did what he could to comfort her, but with little effect. At length Becky said:

贝基眼泪夺眶而出，号啕大哭起来。汤姆使出浑身解数来安慰她，可是没什么用处。最后贝基说：

"Tom!"

“汤姆！”

"Well, Becky?"

“怎么了，贝基？”

"They'll miss us and hunt for us!"

“他们会想起我俩，来找我们的！”

"Yes, they will! Certainly they will!"

“说得对，他们会的，一定会的！”

"Maybe they're hunting for us now, Tom."

“说不定现在就在找呢，汤姆。”

"Why, I reckon maybe they are. I hope they are."

“嗯，我想也是这样，希望如此。”

"When would they miss us, Tom?"

“汤姆，他们什么时候会发现我们丢了？”

"When they get back to the boat, I reckon."

“大概是回到船上的时候吧，我猜。”

"Tom, it might be dark then — would they notice we hadn't come?"

“汤姆，那时可能天黑了，他们会注意到我们没回去吗？”

"I don't know. But anyway, your mother would miss you as soon as they got home."

“我不清楚。不管怎样，他们一到家，你妈妈就会发现你不见了的。”

A frightened look in Becky's face brought Tom to his senses and he saw that he had made a blunder. Becky was not to have gone home that night! The children became silent and thoughtful. In a moment a new burst of grief from Becky showed Tom that the thing in his mind had struck hers also — that the Sabbath morning might be half spent before Mrs. Thatcher discovered that Becky was not at Mrs. Harper's.

贝基脸上害怕的神情让汤姆意识到他刚刚犯了个大错。贝基说好那天晚上不回家的！两个孩子陷入了沉默，忧心忡忡。突然一阵悲哀袭上贝基心头，汤姆脑子里也闪过了同样的想法——有可能安息日的早晨过了一半，撒切尔夫人才会发现贝基不在哈帕夫人家。

The children fastened their eyes upon their bit of candle and watched it melt slowly and pitilessly away; saw the half inch of wick stand alone at last; saw the feeble flame rise and fall, climb the thin column of smoke, linger at its top a moment, and then — the horror of utter darkness reigned.

孩子们紧盯着那一小截蜡烛，看着它一点一点、无情地融化掉，最后只有半英寸的烛心立在那里，微弱的的火苗忽高忽低，一缕轻烟向上爬着，在顶部徘徊了一会儿，接着恐怖的黑暗统治了一切。

How long afterward it was that Becky came to a slow consciousness that she was crying in Tom's arms, neither could tell. All that they knew was, that after what seemed a mighty stretch of time, both awoke out of a dead stupor of sleep and resumed their miseries once more. Tom said it might be Sunday, now — maybe Monday. He tried to get Becky to talk, but her sorrows were too oppressive, all her hopes were gone. Tom said that they must have been missed long ago, and no doubt the search was going on. He would shout and maybe someone would come. He tried it; but in the darkness the distant echoes sounded so hideously that he tried it no more.

也不知过了多久，贝基才慢慢意识到她正趴在汤姆怀里哭，谁都说不上来，只知道好像一段很长的时间之后，两人从都昏睡中醒来，再度一筹莫展。汤姆说现在可能是星期天，也可能是星期一。他试着让贝基说说话，可是她太难过了，所有的希望都没了。汤姆说他们一定老早就走失了，毫无疑问，人们正在找他俩，大叫几声，也许就会有人来了。他试了一下，可是黑暗中，远处的回声听起来十分可怕，就没敢再喊。

The hours wasted away, and hunger came to torment the captives again. A portion of Tom's half of the cake was left; they divided and ate it. But they seemed hungrier than before. The poor morsel of food only whetted desire.

时间一分一秒地逝去，饥饿又开始折磨这两个小俘虏。汤姆的那份蛋糕还剩下一块，他们就分分吃了。可是现在觉得更饿了。那可怜的一小口食物反而激起了食欲。

By and by Tom said:

过了一会，汤姆说：

"Sh! Did you hear that?"

“嘘！你听见了吗？”

Both held their breath and listened. There was a sound like the faintest, far-off shout. Instantly Tom answered it, and leading Becky by the hand, started groping down the corridor in its direction. Presently he listened again; again the sound was heard, and apparently a little nearer.

两人都屏住呼吸听着，像是从远处传来了一阵模糊的喊叫声。汤姆立即喊了回去，拉着贝基的手，顺着通道，向声音的方向摸索过去。他又听了听，有声音，而且明显地近了一点。

"It's them!" said Tom; "they're coming! Come along, Becky — we're all right now!"

“是他们！”汤姆说，“他们来了！快来，贝基——我们现在得救了！”

The joy of the prisoners was almost overwhelming. Their speed was slow, however, because pitfalls were somewhat common, and had to be guarded against. They shortly came to one and had to stop. It might be three feet deep, it might be a hundred — there was no passing it at any rate. Tom got down on his breast and reached as far down as he could. No bottom. They must stay there and wait until the searchers came. They listened; evidently the distant shoutings were growing more distant! a moment or two more and they had gone altogether. The heart-sinking misery of it! Tom whooped until he was hoarse, but it was of no use. He talked hopefully to Becky; but an age of anxious waiting passed and no sounds came again.

两个囚犯高兴疯了。不过他俩走得很慢，因为经常会有些坑坑洼洼，得小心点才行。很快，他们就碰到一个坑，不得不停下来。那坑可能有三英尺深，也可能有一百英尺深——不管怎么说是跨不过去的。汤姆趴在地上，尽量伸手向下面摸。摸不到底。于是他们必须待在这里，等着搜救的人过来。他俩听着，结果很明显的，远处的喊声现在变得更远了。一会工夫后，声音一点也听不到了。太让人失望了！汤姆喊得嗓子都哑了也无济于事。他怀着希望和贝基讲着话，可两人焦虑地等了很久，再也没有声音传来。

The children groped their way back to the spring. The weary time dragged on; they slept again, and awoke famished and woe-stricken. Tom believed it must be Tuesday by this time.

孩子们又摸回泉水旁。时间缓慢的拖过，令人乏味。他们又睡了一觉，醒来时饥肠辘辘，忧心忡忡。汤姆坚信现在一定已经星期二。

Now an idea struck him. There were some side passages near at hand. It would be better to explore some of these than bear the weight of the heavy time in idleness. He took a kite line from his pocket, tied it to a projection, and he and Becky started, Tom in the lead, unwinding the line as he groped along. At the end of twenty steps the corridor ended in a "jumping-off place." Tom got down on his knees and felt below, and then as far around the corner as he could reach with his hands conveniently; he made an effort to stretch yet a little further to the right, and at that moment, not twenty yards away, a human hand, holding a candle, appeared from behind a rock! Tom lifted up a glorious shout, and instantly that hand was followed by the body it belonged to — Injun Joe's! Tom was paralyzed; he could not move. He was vastly gratified the next moment, to see the "Spaniard" take to his heels and get himself out of sight. Tom wondered that Joe had not recognized his voice and come over and killed him for testifying in court. But the echoes must have disguised the voice. Without doubt, that was it, he reasoned. Tom's fright weakened every muscle in his body. He said to himself that if he had strength enough to get back to the spring he would stay there, and nothing should tempt him to run the risk of meeting Injun Joe again. He was careful to keep from Becky what it was he had seen. He told her he had only shouted "for luck."

突然，他想出了个主意。附近有许多岔路，与其在这里无所事事的熬时间，不如去闯几条路。他从口袋里掏出一根风筝线，系在一块突出的石头上，然后和贝基一起出发了，他在头里走，一边向前摸索一边放线。走了有二十步，通道没有了，尽头可以跳下去。汤姆跪下来往下摸着，毫不费力地就摸到了拐角处，他又向右边使劲够了够，就在这时，不到二十码的地方，有只手，拿着蜡烛，从石头后面出来了。汤姆大喝一声，跟着那只手的主人也露出来了——是印第安·乔！汤姆吓瘫了，动弹不得。所幸紧接着那西班牙人拔腿就跑，转眼就不见了。汤姆猜乔应该没听出他的声音，才没有过来杀了他，以报在法庭上作证之仇。回音让声音难以辨认。毫无疑问，就是这样，汤姆合计着。他吓得全身的肌肉都软了，自言自语道，要是还有力气回到泉水边，他一定待在那里，什么都别想让他冒险跑出来再碰上印第安·乔。他很谨慎，没有告诉贝基他看到了什么。只说大喝一声是为了碰碰运气。

But hunger and wretchedness rise superior to fears in the long run. Another tedious wait at the spring and another long sleep brought changes. The children awoke tortured with a raging hunger. Tom believed that it must be Wednesday or Thursday or even Friday or Saturday, now, and that the search had been given over. He proposed to explore another passage. He felt willing to risk Injun Joe and all other terrors. But Becky was very weak. She had sunk into a dreary apathy and would not be roused. She said she would wait, now, where she was, and die — it would not be long. She told Tom to go with the kite line and explore if he chose; but she implored him to come back every little while and speak to her; and she made him promise that when the awful time came, he would stay by her and hold her hand until all was over.

可是从长远的角度来说，饥饿和疲乏的问题比害怕严重多了。又一阵漫长的等待和昏睡后，两个孩子改变了想法。他们一醒来就被饥饿折磨。汤姆相信现在肯定是星期三或是星期四了，甚至可能是星期五、星期六，大伙们一定已经停止搜寻了，他提议重新找一条出路。汤姆甘愿冒着遇到印第安·乔和别的什么危险。问题是贝基虚弱得很。她陷入了麻木状态，对什么都无动于衷。她说她就原地待着等着，然后死去——这应该不会太久了。如果汤姆愿意的话他可以带着风筝线去找，但要求他时不时地回来和她说说话，还要保证在最坏的时刻来临时，一定要守在她身旁，握着她的手，直到一切都结束。

Tom kissed her, with a choking sensation in his throat, and made a show of being confident of finding the searchers or an escape from the cave; then he took the kite line in his hand and went groping down one of the passages on his hands and knees, distressed with hunger and sick with bodings of coming doom.

汤姆吻了她，嗓子里有种哽噎的感觉，表面上却还装出信心十足的样子，他一定会找到搜救的人，或者是出口。然后汤姆攥着风筝线，四脚着地爬进一条通道，尽管饥饿让他沮丧，死到临头的想法让他悲伤。





Chapter 32


第三十二章

TUESDAY afternoon came, and waned to the twilight. The village of St. Petersburg still mourned. The lost children had not been found. Public prayers had been offered up for them, and many and many a private prayer that had the petitioner's whole heart in it; but still no good news came from the cave. The majority of the searchers had given up the quest and gone back to their daily avocations, saying that it was plain the children could never be found. Mrs. Thatcher was very ill, and a great part of the time delirious. People said it was heartbreaking to hear her call her child, and raise her head and listen a whole minute at a time, then lay it wearily down again with a moan. Aunt Polly had drooped into a settled melancholy, and her gray hair had grown almost white. The village went to its rest on Tuesday night, sad and forlorn.

星期二下午，直到黄昏，圣彼得堡村都沉浸在悲痛之中。两个走失的孩子还没有找到。大家为他俩举行了公开祷告，还有许多许多人私下里祈祷，诚心诚意，可仍然没有好消息传来。大多数搜救的人都已经放弃寻找，回家做自己的事情去了，他们认为很显然找不到那两个孩子了。撒切尔夫人生了大病，大部分时间都语无伦次的。大家说，听她呼唤着自己的孩子，不时抬起头听着，整整有一分钟时间，然后无力地垂下头，呻吟着，真叫人心碎。波莉姨妈一直愁眉不展，灰色的头发几乎全都变白了。星期二晚上，整个村庄在一片悲哀和绝望中安静了下来。

Away in the middle of the night a wild peal burst from the village bells, and in a moment the streets were swarming with frantic half-clad people, who shouted, "Turn out! turn out!they're found!they're found!" Tin pans and horns were added to the din, the population massed itself and moved toward the river, met the children coming in an open carriage drawn by shouting citizens, thronged around it, joined its homeward march, and swept magnificently up the main street roaring huzzah after huzzah!

半夜时分，村里的钟突然当当地响起来，顷刻之间，街道上就挤满了狂喜的人，他们连衣服都没来得及穿好，大声嚷着：“大家快起来，快起来，孩子找到了！孩子找到了！”喧嚣声中还夹杂这铁盆和号角的声音，大批的人聚集起来，向小河走去，去迎接两个孩子坐的那辆敞篷马车，村民们前呼后拥，围住了马车，向他俩家的方向前进。整条大街上都人潮涌动，欢呼声此起彼伏。

The village was illuminated; nobody went to bed again; it was the greatest night the little town had ever seen. During the first half hour a procession of villagers filed through Judge Thatcher's house, seized the saved ones and kissed them, squeezed Mrs.Thatcher's hand, tried to speak but couldn't — and drifted out raining tears all over the place.

村子里灯火通明，没人回去睡觉，这是这村庄度过的最壮观的一夜。起初的半小时里，村民们一个接一个地来到撒切尔法官家里，抱着两个获救的孩子就亲，抓着撒切尔太太的手，想说点什么，又说不出来——之后又涌了出去，泪水洒得到处都是。

Aunt Polly's happiness was complete, and Mrs. Thatcher's nearly so. It would be complete, however, as soon as the messenger dispatched with the great news to the cave should get the word to her husband.

波莉姨妈开心极了，撒切尔夫人也差不多。等到派往洞里报喜的人把这个消息告诉了她丈夫，撒切尔夫人也会开心到极点了。

Tom lay upon a sofa with an eager auditory about him and told the history of the wonderful adventure, putting in many striking additions to adorn it withal; and closed with a description of how he left Becky and went on an exploring expedition; how he followed two avenues as far as his kite line would reach; how he followed a third to the fullest stretch of the kite line, and was about to turn back when he glimpsed a far-off speck that looked like daylight; dropped the line and groped toward it, pushed his head and shoulders through a small hole, and saw the broad Mississippi rolling by! And if it had only happened to be night he would not have seen that speck of daylight and would not have explored that passage any more! He told how he went back for Becky and broke the good news and she told him not to fret her with such stuff, for she was tired, and knew she was going to die, and wanted to.

汤姆躺在沙发上，周围一群热心的听者听他讲述这次历险的故事，还经常添油加醋一番。最后，他描述了他如何离开贝基去探险；如何沿着两条通道前行，风筝线有多长就走了多远；又是如何走到第三个通道，风筝线都放开了，他刚要往回走，就看到远处有个亮点，看起来像是阳光，于是就丢下线向那里摸索去，从一个小洞里挤出头和肩膀，看见宽阔的密西西比河滚滚流过。如果当时恰好是晚上，他就不会发现那点阳光，也就不可能找到这条通道。汤姆还讲了他是如何回去，把这个好消息告诉贝基，可贝基却说她累了，不要拿这种东西来烦她，她知道自己就要死了，也愿意这样。

He described how he labored with her and convinced her; and how she almost died for joy when she had groped to where she actually saw the blue speck of daylight; how he pushed his way out of the hole and then helped her out; how they sat there and cried for gladness; how some men came along in a skiff and Tom hailed them and told them their situation and their famished condition; how the men didn't believe the wild tale at first, "because," said they, "you are five miles down the river below the valley the cave is in" — then took them aboard, rowed to a house, gave them supper, made them rest till two or three hours after dark and then brought them home.

然后汤姆又描述了他如何费尽口舌说服贝基，还有当贝基摸索到能看见蓝色天光的地方时，她简直高兴死了；他挤到洞外，把贝基也拉出了来，然后两人如何一起坐在那里，高兴地直哭；然后有几个人乘小艇经过，汤姆招呼住他们，讲明自己的处境，他俩快饿死了。那几个人起初不相信这荒唐的事，“因为，”他们讲，“你们现在在河下游距离山洞五英里的地方”——然后那几个人让他俩上了小艇，划到一座房子处，让他俩吃了晚饭，天黑后休息了两三个小时，才把他们带回家。

Before day dawned, Judge Thatcher and the handful of searchers with him were tracked out, in the cave, by the twine clews they had strung behind them, and informed of the great news.

天亮之前，送信的人根据留下的麻绳记号找到了撒切尔法官和几个搜救的人，告诉了他们这个重大的消息。

Three days and nights of toil and hunger in the cave were not to be shaken off at once, as Tom and Becky soon discovered. They were bedridden all of Wednesday and Thursday, and seemed to grow more and more tired and worn, all the time. Tom got about, a little, on Thursday, was downtown Friday, and nearly as whole as ever Saturday; but Becky did not leave her room until Sunday, and then she looked as if she had passed through a wasting illness.

这三天三夜在洞中的跋涉和饥饿，不是一下子恢复过来的，汤姆和贝基很快就发现了这点。整个星期三和星期四，他们都卧床不起，好像越来越乏力。星期四，汤姆稍微活动了一下，星期五就到镇上去了，到星期六几乎完全恢复了原样，可是贝基一直到星期天才出门，好像刚刚一场大病似的。

Tom learned of Huck's sickness and went to see him on Friday, but could not be admitted to the bedroom; neither could he on Saturday or Sunday. He was admitted daily after that, but was warned to keep still about his adventure and introduce no exciting topic. The Widow Douglas stayed by to see that he obeyed. At home Tom learned of the Cardiff Hill event; also that the "ragged man's" body had eventually been found in the river near the ferry landing; he had been drowned while trying to escape, perhaps.

汤姆听说哈克病了，于是星期五去看他，可是不允许进卧室，星期六和星期天也没能进去。之后，他被允许每天都去，但是对历险的事情要缄口不提，也不能谈什么使人激动的话题；道格拉斯寡妇待在旁边监督汤姆。汤姆在家中听说了卡第夫山事件，还知道人们后来在渡口附近的河里发现了那个“衣衫褴褛”的人的尸体，可能是在逃跑途中淹死了。

About a fortnight after Tom's rescue from the cave, he started off to visit Huck, who had grown plenty strong enough, now, to hear exciting talk, and Tom had some that would interest him, he thought. Judge Thatcher's house was on Tom's way, and he stopped to see Becky. The Judge and some friends set Tom to talking, and someone asked him ironically if he wouldn't like to go to the cave again. Tom said he thought he wouldn't mind it. The Judge said:

从洞中获救两星期后，汤姆又去看望哈克，哈克现在已经结实多了，可以听一些让人激动的话。汤姆想，有些事情哈克肯定感兴趣。汤姆路过撒切尔法官家时，停下来去看了看贝基，法官和几个朋友让汤姆讲讲，有个人半开玩笑地问汤姆还愿不愿意旧洞重游。汤姆说他不介意。法官就说：

"Well, there are others just like you, Tom, I've not the least doubt. But we have taken care of that. Nobody will get lost in that cave any more."

“是啊，我一点也不怀疑，还会再有你这样的人，汤姆。所以我们现在采取了些措施，再也不会有人在洞里迷路了。”

"Why?"

“为什么？”

"Because I had its big door sheathed with boiler iron two weeks ago, and triple-locked — and I've got the keys."

“因为两周前我已经用锅炉用的铁板把大门钉上了一层，上了三道锁——钥匙由我保管。”

Tom turned as white as a sheet.

汤姆的脸变得像纸一样白。

"What's the matter, boy! Here, run, somebody! Fetch a glass of water!"

“你怎么啦？孩子，快，谁！快去倒杯水来！”

The water was brought and thrown into Tom's face.

有人取来了水，泼在汤姆的脸上。

"Ah, now you're all right. What was the matter with you, Tom?"

“啊，你现在没事了，汤姆，你到底是怎么啦？”

"Oh, Judge, Injun Joe's in the cave!"

“法官大人，印第安·乔还在洞里呐！”





Chapter 33


第三十三章

WITHIN a few minutes the news had spread, and a dozen skiffloads of men were on their way to McDougal's cave, and the ferryboat, well filled with passengers, soon followed. Tom Sawyer was in the skiff that bore Judge Thatcher.

几分钟之内消息就传开了，十几只小艇的人立即动身前往麦克道格拉斯山洞，渡船也满载着乘客随后跟去。汤姆·索亚在撒切尔法官乘坐的那艘小艇上。

When the cave door was unlocked, a sorrowful sight presented itself in the dim twilight of the place. Injun Joe lay stretched upon the ground, dead, with his face close to the crack of the door, as if his longing eyes had been fixed, to the latest moment, upon the light and the cheer of the free world outside. Tom was touched, for he knew by his own experience how this wretch had suffered. His pity was moved, but nevertheless he felt an abounding sense of relief and security, now, which revealed to him in a degree which he had not fully appreciated before how vast a weight of dread had been lying upon him since the day he lifted his voice against this bloody-minded outcast.

洞口的锁一打开，暗淡的光线下就显现出一幅凄惨的景象。印第安·乔伸着四肢躺在地上，已经死了。他的脸紧靠着门缝，好像在最后一刻，还在用企盼的眼神盯着外面自由世界里的光明和欢乐。汤姆为之动容了，因为他亲身经历过，知道这个可怜的人所遭受的痛苦。尽管动了恻隐之心，但不管怎么说汤姆现在感到十分地快慰和安全。他以前都没有体会到，自打那天他说出了这个坏蛋的罪行之后，恐惧一直沉重地压在他的心上。

Injun Joe's bowie knife lay close by, its blade broken in two. The great foundation beam of the door had been chipped and hacked through, with tedious labor; useless labor, too, it was, for the native rock formed a sill outside it, and upon that stubborn material the knife had wrought no effect; the only damage done was to the knife itself. But if there had been no stony obstruction there the labor would have been useless still, for if the beam had been wholly cut away Injun Joe could not have squeezed his body under the door, and he knew it. So he had only hacked that place in order to be doing something — in order to pass the weary time — in order to employ his tortured faculties. Ordinarily one could find half a dozen bits of candle stuck around in the crevices of this vestibule, left there by tourists; but there were none now. The prisoner had searched them out and eaten them. He had also contrived to catch a few bats, and these, also, he had eaten, leaving only their claws. The poor unfortunate had starved to death. In one place near at hand, a stalagmite had been slowly growing up from the ground for ages, builded by the water-drip from a stalactite overhead. The captive had broken off the stalagmite, and upon the stump had placed a stone, wherein he had scooped a shallow hollow to catch the precious drop that fell once every three minutes with the dreary regularity of a clock tick — a dessert spoonful once in four and twenty hours. That drop was falling when the Pyramids were new; when Troy fell; when the foundations of Rome were laid; when Christ was crucified; when the Conqueror created the British empire; when Columbus sailed; when the massacre at Lexington was "news." It is falling now; it will still be falling when all these things shall have sunk down the afternoon of history, and the twilight of tradition, and been swallowed up in the thick night of oblivion. Has everything a purpose and a mission? Did this drop fall patiently during five thousand years to be ready for this flitting human insect's need? and has it another important object to accomplish ten thousand years to come? No matter. It is many and many a year since the hapless half-breed scooped out the stone to catch the priceless drops, but to this day the tourist stares longest at that pathetic stone and that slow-dropping water when he comes to see the wonders of McDougal's cave. Injun Joe's cup stands first in the list of the cavern's marvels; even "Aladdin's Palace" cannot rival it.

印第安·乔的那把猎刀就在旁边，刀刃已裂成两半。门上的大横木被坎出了个缺口，这需要漫长的努力，可同时也是无用的努力，因为在外面石头天然地形成了一个门栏，在如此顽固的材料面前，刀子起不到任何作用，相反刀倒砍坏了。就算那儿没有石头拦着，印第安·乔的努力也还是白搭，就算大横木被砍断了，他也不可能从门底下钻出来，他自己也明白这一点。所以他砍门只是为了找点事干，好打发那令人厌倦的时光，让备受折磨的身体有事情做。通常，人们可以在这个石窟中找到五六截蜡烛头，都是游客插在石缝中的，可是现在一截也不剩了。因为这个被困的家伙把所有的蜡烛头都找出来吃掉了。他还设法捉到几只蝙蝠，也全吃掉了，只剩几只爪子。这个可怜而又不幸的家伙是饿死的。在不远处，有个多年来长成的石笋，是由顶上的钟乳石滴水所形成的。这个受困者把石笋弄断后，在残余的桩子上放了块石头，他在石头上凿了一个浅浅的窝来接水，这些宝贵的水滴每三分钟才滴一滴，像钟表的滴答声一样沉闷而规律，二十四个小时才能接满一只吃甜点的小匙。这水一直在滴，在金字塔还崭新之时；在特洛伊城陷落之时；在罗马城刚刚奠基之时；在基督被钉上十字架之时；在征服者威廉大帝创建大英帝国之时；在航海家哥伦布出航之时；在莱克星顿大屠杀还鲜为人知之时。现在它还在滴，即使一切都随着历史与传统的黄昏沉没，淹没在遗忘的黑夜之中，它还会滴淌下去。是不是世间万物都有一个目的，一个使命呢？五千年来这水滴默默地流淌，是不是专为这个可怜虫准备的呢？一万年后，它是不是又要完成什么别的重要任务呢？这些都不要紧。在那个倒霉的混血儿用石头去接那宝贵的水之后，已过去了许多许多年，至今，来麦克道格拉斯山洞观赏奇观时，游客们会在这令人伤感的石头和缓缓而下的水滴前驻足许久，印第安·乔的“杯子”是洞中第一奇观，连“阿拉丁宫殿”也比不上它。

Injun Joe was buried near the mouth of the cave; and people flocked there in boats and wagons from the town and from all the farms and hamlets for seven miles around; they brought their children, and all sorts of provisions, and confessed that they had had almost as satisfactory a time at the funeral as they could have had at the hanging.

印第安·乔被埋在山洞口附近。人们从村庄、甚至方圆七里外的农场和村子里，坐着小船或马车成群结队的来到这里，带着孩子，和各种各样的吃的。坦白地说，他们看乔被埋葬和看他被绞死差不多一样满意。

This funeral stopped the further growth of one thing — the petition to the Governor for Injun Joe's pardon. The petition had been largely signed; many tearful and eloquent meetings had been held, and a committee of sappy women been appointed to go in deep mourning and wail around the Governor, and implore him to be a merciful ass and trample his duty under foot. Injun Joe was believed to have killed five citizens of the village, but what of that? If he had been Satan himself there would have been plenty of weaklings ready to scribble their names to a pardon petition, and drip a tear on it from their permanently impaired and leaky waterworks.

葬礼过后，人们不再向州长请求赦免印第安·乔了。许多人都曾在请愿书上签名，开过不少声泪俱下的会议，还有一个请愿团，组织了一些心肠软的妇女，穿着丧服到州长那里哭诉，请求他发发慈悲，职责什么的就踩在脚下吧。据说印第安·乔曾杀过五个人，可那又怎么样呢？就算他是魔鬼撒旦，也还会有一帮软弱的糊涂蛋在请愿书上签名，还要从他们那永远也修不好的漏水“龙头”里滴几滴眼泪在上面。

The morning after the funeral Tom took Huck to a private place to have an important talk. Huck had learned all about Tom's adventure from the Welshman and the Widow Douglas, by this time, but Tom said he reckoned there was one thing they had not told him; that thing was what he wanted to talk about now. Huck's face saddened. He said:

葬礼后的那天早晨，汤姆把哈克叫到一个隐蔽的地方，有重要的事情要说。此时，哈克已经从威尔斯曼和道格拉斯寡妇那里得知了汤姆的历险。可汤姆却说，他猜有一件事情他们一定没告诉哈克，这正是他现在要讲的。哈克的脸色沉了下来。他说：

"I know what it is. You got into No. 2 and never found anything but whisky. Nobody told me it was you; but I just knowed it must 'a' been you, soon as I heard 'bout that whisky business; and I knowed you hadn't got the money becuz you'd a got at me some way or other and told me even if you was mum to everybody else. Tom, something's always told me we'd never get holt of that swag."

“我知道是什么，你进了二号，除威士忌外，什么东西也没找到。没人告诉我是你干的，可我一听到威士忌的事，就知道一定是你，而且我还知道你没找到钱，不然你早就想方设法跟我说了，就算你对其他人都保持沉默。汤姆，我总觉得，我们永远也得不到那份财宝。”

"Why, Huck, I never told on that tavernkeeper. You know his tavern was all right the Saturday I went to the picnic. Don't you remember you was to watch there that night?"

“我说哈克，我从来也没有告发客栈老板，你知道星期六我去野餐时，他的客栈还好好的。你不记得了么，那天晚上该你去守夜。”

"Oh yes! Why, it seems 'bout a year ago. It was that very night that I follered Injun Joe to the widder's."

“噢，对了！怎么，这像是一年前的事情了。正是那天晚上，我跟着印第安·乔到了寡妇家。”

"You followed him?"

“是你跟踪的他呀！”

"Yes — but you keep mum. I reckon Injun Joe's left friends behind him, and I don't want 'em souring on me and doing me mean tricks. If it hadn't ben for me he'd be down in Texas now, all right."

“是我，可别声张出去。我想印第安·乔还有朋友，我不希望他们恨我，来报复我，要不是我，他现在一定好好的到了得克萨斯州了。”

Then Huck told his entire adventure in confidence to Tom, who had only heard of the Welshman's part of it before.

于是哈克把他的全部历险都悄悄地告诉了汤姆。在这之前，汤姆只听说过威尔斯曼的故事。

"Well," said Huck, presently, coming back to the main question, "whoever nipped the whisky in No. 2, nipped the money, too, I reckon — anyways it's a goner for us, Tom."

“喂，”哈克接着回到主要问题上来，“我想，谁搞到了二号的威士忌，也就搞到了那些钱，反正咱俩是没戏了，汤姆。”

"Huck, that money wasn't ever in No. 2!"

“哈克，那财宝根本就不在二号里！”

"What!" Huck searched his comrade's face keenly. "Tom, have you got on the track of that money again?"

“什么？”哈克仔细打量着同伴的脸。“汤姆，难道你又找到了那些钱的新线索？”

"Huck, it's in the cave!"

“哈克，它就在洞里呀！”

Huck's eyes blazed.

哈克的眼睛闪闪发光。

"Say it again, Tom."

“再说一遍，汤姆。”

"The money's in the cave!"

“钱在洞里！”

"Tom — honest injun, now — is it fun, or earnest?"

“汤姆，老实说，你是开玩笑的，还是说真的？”

"Earnest, Huck — just as earnest as ever I was in my life. Will you go in there with me and help get it out?"

“真的，哈克，我这辈子一向说真话。你要不要跟我去，把它弄出来？”

"I bet I will! I will if it's where we can blaze our way to it and not get lost."

“我肯定去啊！只要我们能进得去，不会迷路，我就跟你去。”

"Huck, we can do that without the least little bit of trouble in the world."

“哈克，这次决不会遇到一丁点麻烦事了。”

"Good as wheat! What makes you think the money's —"

“棒极了，你怎么想到钱在——”

"Huck, you just wait till we get in there.If we don't find it I'll agree to give you my drum and every thing I've got in the world. I will, by jings."

“哈克，先等我们进到那里。要是找不到财宝，我情愿你把我的小鼓拿走，还有别的所有东西。决不失言。”

"All right — it's a whiz. When do you say?"

“好，一言为定。你说什么时候？”

"Right now, if you say it. Are you strong enough?"

“马上就去，你看呢？你身体行吗？”

"Is it far in the cave? I ben on my pins a little, three or four days, now, but I can't walk more'n a mile, Tom — least I don't think I could."

“在洞的深处吗？我已经回复了三四天了，不过只能走一英里，汤姆，至少我觉得是这样。”

"It's about five mile into there the way anybody but me would go, Huck, but there's a mighty short cut that they don't anybody but me know about. Huck, I'll take you right to it in a skiff. I'll float the skiff down there, and I'll pull it back again all by myself. You needn't ever turn your hand over."

“哈克，别人进到那里得走五英里，不过有一条绝好的近路，除了我没人知道。我马上划小船带你过去。我会把船停在那儿，然后再自己划回来，你根本不用动手。”

"Less start right off, Tom."

“汤姆，我们这就走吧！”

"All right. We want some bread and meat, and our pipes, and a little bag or two, and two or three kite strings, and some of these newfangled things they call lucifer matches. I tell you, many's the time I wished I had some when I was in there before."

“行，我们得备点面包、肉，还有烟斗、一两只小口袋、两三根风筝线，还有那个叫魔鬼火柴的玩意。告诉你，上次在洞里，好几回我都希望我有那个东西。”

A trifle after noon the boys borrowed a small skiff from a citizen who was absent, and got under way at once. When they were several miles below "Cave Hollow," Tom said:

中午刚过，两个孩子乘主人不在“借”了条船，立即动身出发了。在“空心洞”下面几英里的地方，汤姆说：

"Now you see this bluff here looks all alike all the way down from the cave hollow — no houses, no woodyards, bushes all alike. But do you see that white place up yonder where there's been a landslide? Well, that's one of my marks. We'll get ashore, now."

“你瞧，这高崖从这里直到空心洞一个样：没有房子，没有木厂，连灌木丛都一样。不过你看见远处那个白色的地方了么，那里曾经发生过山崩，那就是我的记号之一。现在该上岸了。”

They landed.

于是他们上了岸。

"Now, Huck, where we're a-standing you could touch that hole I got out of with a fishing pole. See if you can find it."

“哈克，在你现在站着的地方，可以摸到我用鱼竿钻出来的一个洞，你找找看。”

Huck searched all the place about, and found nothing. Tom proudly marched into a thick clump of sumac bushes and said:

哈克整个都搜遍了，没找到什么。然后汤姆很神气地走进一大从茂盛的漆树，说：

"Here you are! Look at it, Huck; it's the snuggest hole in this country. You just keep mum about it. All along I've been wanting to be a robber, but I knew I'd got to have a thing like this, and where to run across it was the bother. We've got it now, and we'll keep it quiet, only we'll let Joe Harper and Ben Rogers in — because of course there's got to be a Gang, or else there wouldn't be any style about it. Tom Sawyer's Gang — it sounds splendid, don't it, Huck?"

“找到了！哈克，看看；这是最隐蔽的洞口，你一定要保密。我一直都想当个强盗，而且我知道强盗需要一个这样的洞，不过去哪里找很费脑筋。现在我们有一个了，但得保密，只能让乔·哈帕和本·罗杰斯进洞，因为我们得有一个“帮”，要不然就没有派头了。汤姆·索亚帮——这名字挺响的，是不是，哈克？”

"Well, it just does, Tom. And who'll we rob?"

“嗯，是挺响的，汤姆。不过我们抢谁呢？”

"Oh, most anybody. Waylay people — that's mostly the way."

“嗯，谁都行。拦路抢劫——一般都是这样的。”

"And kill them?"

“然后杀了他们？”

"No, not always. Hive them in the cave till they raise a ransom."

“不，不总是杀人，把他们撵到洞里，拿钱来赎。”

"What's a ransom?"

“什么叫赎？”

"Money. You make them raise all they can, off 'n their friends; and after you've kept them a year, if it ain't raised then you kill them. That's the general way. Only you don't kill the women. You shut up the women, but you don't kill them. They're always beautiful and rich, and awfully scared. You take their watches and things, but you always take your hat off and talk polite. They ain't anybody as polite as robbers — you'll see that in any book. Well, the women get to loving you, and after they've been in the cave a week or two weeks they stop crying and after that you couldn't get them to leave. If you drove them out they'd turn right around and come back. It's so in all the books."

“就是用钱换人。叫他们把自己所有的钱统统拿出来，还有朋友的钱，若一年内他们还交不上赎金，就撕票。通常就这么干。不过我们不杀女人，只是把她们关起来，不用杀了。她们通常都长得很漂亮，也有钱，而且被吓得够呛。你可以拿她们的手表和东西，但你要行脱帽礼，还要有礼貌的说话。没有人比强盗更有礼貌了——你会看到所有书里都是这么写的。然后女人会渐渐地爱上你，在洞里呆上一两周后，她们就不哭了，之后你赶都赶不走了。就算你把她们赶出去，她们转身就回来了。所有的书上都是这么描写的。”

"Why, it's real bully, Tom. I b'lieve it's better'n to be a pirate."

“哇，太棒了，汤姆，我觉得这比做海盗还好。”

"Yes, it's better in some ways, because it's close to home and circuses and all that."

“的确有些好处，这样离家、马戏团什么的都很近。”

By this time everything was ready and the boys entered the hole, Tom in the lead. They toiled their way to the farther end of the tunnel, then made their spliced kite strings fast and moved on. A few steps brought them to the spring, and Tom felt a shudder quiver all through him. He showed Huck the fragment of candlewick perched on a lump of clay against the wall, and described how he and Becky had watched the flame struggle and expire.

此刻，一切准备就绪，两个孩子就钻进了山洞，汤姆打头。他们好不容易走到通道的另一头，系紧风筝线，又继续往前走。没几步就来到泉水处，汤姆浑身一阵冷颤，他让哈克看放在墙边泥块上的那截蜡烛芯，讲述了他和贝基两人如何看着蜡火挣扎着，直至熄灭。

The boys began to quiet down to whispers, now, for the stillness and gloom of the place oppressed their spirits. They went on, and presently entered and followed Tom's other corridor until they reached the "jumping-off place." The candles revealed the fact that it was not really a precipice, but only a steep clay hill twenty or thirty feet high. Tom whispered:

这里寂静又阴沉，让人觉得压抑，两个孩子不由得压低声音，轻声耳语。他们继续往前走，很快就钻进了另一个通道，一直来到那个可以跳下去的地方。借着烛光可以看见，这里并不是悬崖，只是个二三十英尺高的陡坡。汤姆悄悄说：

Now I'll show you something, Huck."

“哈克，现在让你瞧件东西。”

He held his candle aloft and said:

他高高举起蜡烛说：

"Look as far around the corner as you can. Do you see that? There — on the big rock over yonder — done with candle smoke."

“尽量朝拐角处看，看见了吗？那边——那边的大石头上——有蜡烛烟熏出来的记号。”

"Tom, it's a cross!"

“汤姆，是个十字！”

"Now where's your Number Two? Under the cross,' hey? Right yonder's where I saw Injun Joe poke up his candle, Huck!"

“那么你的二号呢？在十字架下，对吗？哈克，就在那里，我看见印第安·乔举着蜡烛的！”

Huck stared at the mystic sign a while, and then said with a shaky voice:

哈克盯着那神秘的记号看了一阵，然后用颤抖的声音说：

"Tom, less git out of here!"

“汤姆，咱们出去吧！”

"What! and leave the treasure?"

“什么？不要财宝啦？”

"Yes — leave it. Injun Joe's ghost is round about there, certain."

“对，不要财宝啦。印第安·乔的鬼魂就在附近，肯定在。”

"No it ain't, Huck, no it ain't. It would ha'nt the place where he died — away out at the mouth of the cave — five mile from here."

“不会在这里的，哈克。他死的地方才会闹鬼，在洞口，离这儿五英里远呢。”

"No, Tom, it wouldn't. It would hang round the money. I know the ways of ghosts, and so do you."

“不，汤姆，它不在那里，它就在这些钱周围游荡，我晓得鬼的特性，你也知道。”

Tom began to fear that Huck was right. Misgivings gathered in his mind. But presently an idea occurred to him —

汤姆也开始害怕了，也许哈克说得对，疑虑渐渐在他的脑海中出现，但很快他有了个主意：

"Looky-here, Huck, what fools we're making of ourselves! Injun Joe's ghost ain't a-going to come around where there's a cross!"

“看着，哈克，我俩真是十足的大傻瓜。印第安·乔的鬼魂怎么可能在有十字的地方游荡呢！”

The point was well taken. It had its effect.

这点提得好，他的话起了作用。

"Tom, I didn't think of that. But that's so. It's luck for us, that cross is. I reckon we'll climb down there and have a hunt for that box."

“汤姆，我怎么没想到呢。不过确实是这样。那十字架真是我们的运气。我觉得我们该爬下去找那个箱子。”

Tom went first, cutting rude steps in the clay hill as he descended. Huck followed. Four avenues opened out of the small cavern which the great rock stood in. The boys examined three of them with no result. They found a small recess in the one nearest the base of the rock, with a pallet of blankets spread down in it; also an old suspender, some bacon rind, and the wellgnawed bones of two or three fowls. But there was no money box. The lads searched and re-searched this place, but in vain. Tom said:

汤姆先走，他边下边在土坡上打出一些粗糙的脚蹬儿。哈克跟在后面，小石窟中间立着一块巨大的石头，有四条通道通向这里。孩子查看了其中三个，结果一无所获，在最靠近大石头的通道那里，他们发现了一个小坑，里边平铺着几块毯子，还有个旧吊带，一些熏肉皮，两三只啃得干干净净的家禽。但是没有钱箱。两个小家伙在这里找了又找，都没有用。汤姆说：

"He said under the cross. Well, this comes nearest to being under the cross. It can't be under the rock itself, because that sets solid on the ground."

“他说是在十字下，你瞧，这不就是最靠近十字下的地方吗？不可能藏在石头底下面吧，那石头可是结结实实的立在地上的。”

They searched everywhere once more, and then sat down discouraged. Huck could suggest nothing. By and by Tom said:

他们又到到处找了找，灰心丧气地坐下来。哈克想不出什么主意来。最后还是汤姆开了口：

"Looky-here, Huck, there's footprints and some candle grease on the clay about one side of this rock, but not on the other sides. Now, what's that for? I bet you the money is under the rock. I'm going to dig in the clay."

“喂，哈克，这石头一面的泥土上有脚印和蜡烛油，可是另一面什么也没有。这是为什么呢？我跟你打赌钱就在石头下面，我要把它挖出来。”

"That ain't no bad notion, Tom!" said Huck with animation.

“这主意不错，汤姆！”哈克兴奋地说道。

Tom's "real Barlow" was out at once, and he had not dug four inches before he struck wood.

汤姆立刻掏出他的正宗巴罗刀，没挖到四英寸就碰到了木头。

"Hey, Huck! — you hear that?"

“嘿，哈克，你听见了吗？”

Huck began to dig and scratch now. Some boards were soon uncovered and removed. They had concealed a natural chasm which led under the rock. Tom got into this and held his candle as far under the rock as he could, but said he could not see to the end of the rift. He proposed to explore. He stooped and passed under; the narrow way descended gradually. He followed its winding course, first to the right, then to the left, Huck at his heels. Tom turned a short curve, by and by, and exclaimed:

哈克也开始又挖又刨，很快，就挖出了几块木板，他们把木板移走，一个藏在下面的天然裂缝出现了，一直通道石头下面。汤姆举着蜡烛钻了进去，他尽量往里，结果还是看不到裂缝的尽头。他提议去一探究竟。汤姆弯腰钻过去，小路渐渐通到下面。沿着曲折的通道，汤姆先是向右，然后向左，哈克紧随其后。汤姆拐了个小弯，不久，大声叫道：

"My goodness, Huck, looky here!"

“老天爷啊，哈克，看看这儿！”

It was the treasure box, sure enough, occupying a snug little cavern, along with an empty powder keg, a couple of guns in leather cases, two or three pairs of old moccasins, a leather belt, and some other rubbish well soaked with water-drip.

是宝箱，千真万确，放在一个小石窟里，旁边有个空火药桶，一对装在皮套里的枪，两三双旧皮鞋，一条皮带，另外还有些破烂，被水浸得湿漉漉的。

"Got it at last!" said Huck, plowing among the tarnished coins with his hand. "My, but we're rich, Tom!"

“终于找到了！”哈克说着，用手梳理着这些失去光泽的钱币。“天啊，这下我们发财了，汤姆。”

"Huck, I always reckoned we'd get it. It's just too good to believe, but we have got it, sure! Say — let's not fool around here. Let's snake it out. Lemme see if I can lift the box."

“哈克，我一直认为我们会找到的，简直好到难以置信，不过财宝确实到手了！喂，别在这儿逗留了，把箱子弄出去吧。我来看看能不能搬动。”

It weighed about fifty pounds. Tom could lift it, after an awkward fashion, but could not carry it conveniently.

箱子大约有五十磅重。汤姆费了好大的劲才把它提起来，搬着走是不可能的。

"I thought so," he said; "they carried it like it was heavy, that day at the ha'nted house. I noticed that. I reckon I was right to think of fetching the little bags along."

“我早就猜到了，”他说，“那天在鬼屋的时候，他们搬着箱子就十分吃力，我看出来了，我带来这些小布袋子真是太英明。”

The money was soon in the bags and the boys took it up to the cross rock.

钱很快被装进小袋子里，孩子们拿着钱回到了有十字的石头那里。

"Now less fetch the guns and things," said Huck.

“我们拿几把枪和别的东西吧，”哈克说。

"No, Huck — leave them there. They're just the tricks to have when we go to robbing. We'll keep them there all the time, and we'll hold our orgies there, too. It's an awful snug place for orgies."

“不，哈克，别动那些东西，我们以后当强盗的时候正好用得着。就放在那里好了，我们还要来痛饮一番呢。那可是个难得的好地方。”

"What's orgies?"

“什么叫痛饮一番？”

"I dono. But robbers always have orgies, and of course we've got to have them, too. Come along, Huck, we've been in here a long time. It's getting late, I reckon. I'm hungry, too. We'll eat and smoke when we get to the skiff."

“我也不知道，不过强盗们总是痛饮一番，我们当然也要这样。快走，哈克，我们在这里待了很久了，我猜时间不早了。我也饿了，等到船上我们就可以吃点东西，抽抽烟了。”

They presently emerged into the clump of sumac bushes, looked warily out, found the coast clear, and were soon lunching and smoking in the skiff. As the sun dipped toward the horizon they pushed out and got under way. Tom skimmed up the shore through the long twilight, chatting cheerily with Huck, and landed shortly after dark.

很快他俩又从漆树从里钻了出来，警惕地四下看看，发现岸边没人，就跑上船吃起饭，抽起烟来。太阳快落到地平线时，他们撑起船，离岸而去，黄昏的微光中，汤姆沿着岸边，一边划船一边开心地和哈克聊天，天黑不久就上了岸。

"Now, Huck," said Tom, "we'll hide the money in the loft of the widow's woodshed, and I'll come up in the morning and we'll count it and divide, and then we'll hunt up a place out in the woods for it where it will be safe. Just you lay quiet here and watch the stuff till I run and hook Benny Taylor's little wagon; I won't be gone a minute."

“哈克，”汤姆说，“我们把钱藏到寡妇家柴火棚的阁楼上，明天一早我就过去，我们把钱数数分掉，然后再到林子里找个安全的地方把它放好。你待在这儿别动，看着钱，我去把本尼·泰勒的小车子弄来，不会很久的。”

He disappeared, and presently returned with the wagon, put the two small sacks into it, threw some old rags on top of them, and started off, dragging his cargo behind him. When the boys reached the Welshman's house, they stopped to rest. Just as they were about to move on, the Welshman stepped out and said:

汤姆走开了，不一会儿就带着小车回来，把两个小袋子放进去，再盖上些破布，就拖着他的“货物”出发了。走到威尔斯曼家时，他俩停下来休息，他们正要继续往前走，威尔斯曼走出来了，说：

"Hallo, who's that?"

“喂，那是谁呀？”

"Huck and Tom Sawyer."

“是哈克和汤姆·索亚。”

"Good! Come along with me, boys, you are keeping everybody waiting. Here — hurry up, trot ahead — I'll haul the wagon for you. Why, it's not as light as it might be. Got bricks in it? — or old metal?"

“好极了！孩子们，跟我来，大家都在等你俩呢。快点，跑过来，我帮你们拉车，咦，不像看起来的那么轻？装了砖头？还是什么破铜烂铁？”

Old metal," said Tom.

“破铜烂铁。”汤姆说。

"I judged so; the boys in this town will take more trouble and fool away more time, hunting up six bits' worth of old iron to sell to the foundry than they would to make twice the money at regular work. But that's human nature — hurry along, hurry along!"

“我觉得也是，这个镇上的男孩子就是不怕麻烦，喜欢东翻西找，那点破铜烂铁卖给铸造厂最多不过六个子，还不如找点正经的活，能挣上两倍的钱。可人就是这样的——快走吧，快点！”

The boys wanted to know what the hurry was about.

两个孩子想知道为什么这么着急。

"Never mind; you'll see, when we get to the Widow Douglas'."

“别问了，等到了道格拉斯寡妇家你们就知道了。”

Huck said with some apprehension — for he was long used to being falsely accused:

哈克由于经常被安上些莫须有的罪名，心里有些害怕，问道：

"Mr. Jones, we haven't been doing nothing."

“琼斯先生，我们什么事也没干呀！”

The Welshman laughed.

威尔斯曼笑了。

"Well, I don't know, Huck, my boy. I don't know about that. Ain't you and the widow good friends?"

“噢，我不知道，哈克，我的好孩子，我也不知道是什么事，你跟寡妇不是好朋友吗？”

"Yes. Well, she's ben good friends to me, anyways."

“是的，不管怎么说，她一直都是我的朋友。”

"All right, then. What do you want to be afraid for?"

“这就行了，你还有什么可怕的呢？”

This question was not entirely answered in Huck's slow mind before he found himself pushed, along with Tom, into Mrs.Douglas' drawing room. Mr. Jones left the wagon near the door and followed.

哈克脑子慢，还没想明白这个问题，就和汤姆一起被推进了道格拉斯夫人家的客厅。琼斯先生把小车停在门旁，也跟了进来。

The place was grandly lighted, and everybody that was of any consequence in the village was there. The Thatchers were there, the Harpers, the Rogerses, Aunt Polly, Sid, Mary, the minister, the editor, and a great many more, and all dressed in their best. The widow received the boys as heartily as anyone could well receive two such looking beings. They were covered with clay and candle grease. Aunt Polly blushed crimson with humiliation, and frowned and shook her head at Tom. Nobody suffered half as much as the two boys did, however. Mr. Jones said:

客厅里灯火辉煌，村里稍有些名气的人全都在这儿。有撒切尔一家、哈帕一家、罗杰斯一家、波莉姨妈、希德、玛丽、牧师、报馆撰稿人，还有很多别的人，大家都穿着最好的衣服。寡妇热心地接待这两个孩子，恐怕任何人见到这样子的两个孩子都会热心接待的。他俩浑身是泥土和蜡烛油。波莉姨妈臊得满脸通红，冲着汤姆又是皱眉又是摇头。可是没人有这两个孩子一半难受。琼斯先生说：

"Tom wasn't at home, yet, so I gave him up; but I stumbled on him and Huck right at my door, and so I just brought them along in a hurry."

“当时汤姆不在家，所以我就没再找他，可是无意中发现他俩就在我家门口，我就急急忙忙地把他们带来了。”

"And you did just right," said the widow. "Come with me, boys."

“你做得对，”寡妇说，“孩子们跟我来吧。”

She took them to a bedchamber and said:

她把两个孩子领到一间卧室，然后说：

"Now wash and dress yourselves. Here are two new suits of clothes — shirts, socks, everything complete. They're Huck's — no, no thanks, Huck — Mr. Jones bought one and I the other. But they'll fit both of you. Get into them. We'll wait — come down when you are slicked up enough."

“你们洗个澡，换件衣服。这是两套新衣服——衬衣、袜子，样样都有。这是哈克的——不，用不着道谢，哈克，琼斯先生拿来一套，另一套是我拿来的。不过它们都很合身。穿上吧，我们等着——打扮好了就下来。”

Then she left.

她说完走了出去。





Chapter 34


第三十四章

HUCK said: "Tom, we can slope, if we can find a rope. The window ain't high from the ground."

哈克说：“汤姆，要是能找到根绳子，我们就可以滑下去，窗户离地面并不高。”

"Shucks, what do you want to slope for?"

“胡说，干吗要溜走呢？”

"Well, I ain't used to that kind of a crowd. I can't stand it. I ain't going down there, Tom."

“嗯，我不大习惯跟那群人一起，受不了。汤姆，反正我不下去。”

"Oh, bother! It ain't anything. I don't mind it a bit. I'll take care of you."

“唉，真是讨厌！没什么大不了的，我根本不在乎，我会照应你的。”

Sid appeared.

希德来了。

"Tom," said he, "Auntie has been waiting for you all the afternoon. Mary got your Sunday clothes ready, and everybody's been fretting about you. Say — ain't this grease and clay, on your clothes?"

“汤姆，”他说，“波莉姨妈等了你一个下午。玛丽早把你的礼服准备好了，所有人都在为你担心。喂，这不是蜡烛油和黏土吗？在你衣服上。”

"Now, Mr. Siddy, you jist 'tend to your own business. What's all this blowout about, anyway?"

“得了，希德先生，管好你自己的事就行了。话说回来，这么大场面是干什么呢？”

"It's one of the widow's parties that she's always having. This time it's for the Welshman and his sons, on account of that scrape they helped her out of the other night. And say — I can tell you something, if you want to know."

“寡妇家经常举行宴会，这次也是。是为了威尔斯曼和他儿子举行的，感谢他们帮她脱离险境。喂，我还有一件事，想知道么？”

"Well, what?"

“嗯，什么？”

"Why, old Mr. Jones is going to try to spring something on the people here tonight, but I overheard him tell auntie today about it, as a secret, but I reckon it's not much of a secret now. Everybody knows — the widow, too, for all she tries to let on she don't. Mr. Jones was bound Huck should be here — couldn't get along with his grand secret without Huck, you know!"

“什么事？老琼斯先生今晚要给在这里的人们一个惊喜，我今天无意中听到他和姨妈讲的，这是个秘密，不过我想，现在这算不上什么秘密了。人人都知道，寡妇也知道，尽管她竭力掩饰。琼斯先生一定要哈克出席，哈克缺席就不能说出那个大秘密，是吧！”

"Secret about what, Sid?"

“希德，是哪方面的秘密？”

"About Huck tracking the robbers to the widow's. I reckon Mr. Jones was going to make a grand time over his surprise, but I bet you it will drop pretty flat."

“就是哈克跟踪强盗到寡妇家的事情。我猜琼斯先生想把这个惊喜搞成个大事件，不过我敢打赌，会反响平平。”

Sid chuckled in a very contented and satisfied way.

希德心满意足地咯咯笑起来。

"Sid, was it you that told?"

“希德，是不是你把秘密说出去的！”

"Oh, never mind who it was. Somebody told — that's enough."

“得了，别管是谁干的，反正有人说了，这就够了。”

"Sid, there's only one person in this town mean enough to do that, and that's you. If you had been in Huck's place you'd 'a' sneaked down the hill and never told anybody on the robbers. You can't do any but mean things, and you can't bear to see anybody praised for doing good ones. There — no thanks, as the widow says" — and Tom cuffed Sid's ears and helped him to the door with several kicks. "Now go and tell auntie if you dare — and tomorrow you'll catch it!"

“希德，全镇只有一个家伙会下流到做这样的事，那就是你。如果是你处在哈克的位置，你早就溜之大吉，根本不会告诉任何人强盗的事情。你除了这些卑鄙的事情外什么也不会，而且还见不得别人做了好事受表扬。赏你这个——‘不用道谢’，照寡妇的说法。”汤姆拧着希德的耳朵，连踹带踢把他撵出门外。“赶快去向姨妈告状吧，只要你敢，明天就有你好受的。”

Some minutes later the widow's guests were at the supper table, and a dozen children were propped up at little side tables in the same room, after the fashion of that country and that day. At the proper time Mr. Jones made his little speech, in which he thanked the widow for the honor she was doing himself and his sons, but said that there was another person whose modesty —

几分钟后，寡妇家的客人都坐在了晚餐桌旁，按照这个国家当时的习惯，十几个小孩被安排在同一间房的小餐桌旁坐着。时间到了，琼斯先生作了简短的发言，他感谢寡妇给了他和儿子这么大的面子，接着说还有个很谦虚的人——

And so forth and so on. He sprung his secret about Huck's share in the adventure in the finest dramatic manner he was master of, but the surprise it occasioned was largely counterfeit and not as clamorous and effusive as it might have been under happier circumstances. However, the widow made a pretty fair show of astonishment, and heaped so many compliments and so much gratitude upon Huck that he almost forgot the nearly intolerable discomfort of his new clothes in the entirely intolerable discomfort of being set up as a target for everybody's gaze and everybody's laudations.

等等。之后他极尽所能地作出戏剧性的效果，揭开了秘密：哈克也参加了这次历险。人们装得很惊讶，并没有平时在欢快的场面中表现出的情不自禁、大喊大叫。不过，寡妇还是表现出了相当吃惊的样子，她一个劲地赞扬和感激哈克。穿着新衣服、成为所有人注视和赞美的焦点，本来是很难以忍受的，结果哈克现在几乎忘了他的不自在。

The widow said she meant to give Huck a home under her roof and have him educated; and that when she could spare the money she would start him in business in a modest way. Tom's chance was to come. He said:

寡妇说她真心希望给哈克一个家，让他受教育，要是有多余的钱就让他做点小买卖。汤姆终于找着说话的机会了，他说：

"Huck don't need it. Huck's rich."

“哈克不需要那个，他很有钱。”

Nothing but a heavy strain upon the good manners of the company kept back the due and proper complimentary laugh at this pleasant joke. But the silence was a little awkward. Tom broke it:

这可笑的话本来会引发一阵哄笑的，多亏在座的人教养都很好，竭力忍着没有笑出来。不过这么安静还是有点尴尬。汤姆打破了沉默。

"Huck's got money. Maybe you don't believe it, but he's got lots of it. Oh, you needn't smile — I reckon I can show you. You just wait a minute."

“哈克有钱了，你们或许不相信，不过他真有了很多的钱。喂，你们别笑，我会让你们看到的，等一会。”

Tom ran out of doors. The company looked at each other with a perplexed interest — and inquiringly at Huck, who was tongue-tied.

汤姆跑到门外，在座的人面面相觑，疑惑又好奇，向哈克打听，他却张口结舌。

"Sid, what ails Tom?" said Aunt Polly. "He — well, there ain't ever any making of that boy out. I never —"

“希德，汤姆怎么了？”波莉姨妈问道，“他呀——唉，真是从来也猜不透这个孩子，我从来没有——”

Tom entered, struggling with the weight of his sacks, and Aunt Polly did not finish her sentence. Tom poured the mass of yellow coin upon the table and said:

她还没说完，只见汤姆吃力地背着口袋走进来。他把金色的钱币倒在桌上，说：

"There — what did I tell you? Half of it's Huck's and half of it's mine!"

“看呀！我怎么说来着？这里一半是哈克的，一半是我的！”

The spectacle took the general breath away. All gazed, nobody spoke for a moment. Then there was a unanimous call for an explanation. Tom said he could furnish it, and he did. The tale was long, but brimful of interest. There was scarcely an interruption from anyone to break the charm of its flow. When he had finished, Mr. Jones said:

这景象让在座的人都倒吸了一口气。一时间，大家盯着桌上，没有人说话。接着大家一致要求汤姆解释一下。汤姆说他可以满足大家，于是就讲了起来，故事很长，但是充满乐趣。没有一个人打断汤姆引人入胜的叙述。讲完后，琼斯先生说：

"I thought I had fixed up a little surprise for this occasion, but it don't amount to anything now. This one makes it seem mighty small, I'm willing to allow."

“我原以为我为今天准备了一点小惊喜，可是现在那根本不算什么了。我承认，这简直让我的惊喜相形见绌啊。”

The money was counted. The sum amounted to a little over twelve thousand dollars. It was more than anyone present had ever seen at one time before, though several persons were there who were worth considerably more than that in property.

钱被过了数，总共是一万二千块美元多一点。尽管在座的人当中，有的家产远不止这个数，可是在这之前，谁也没一次见过这么多钱。





Chapter 35


第三十五章

THE reader may rest satisfied that Tom's and Huck's windfall made a mighty stir in the poor little village of St. Petersburg. So vast a sum, all in actual cash, seemed next to incredible. It was talked about, gloated over, glorified, until the reason of many of the citizens tottered under the strain of the unhealthy excitement. Every "haunted" house in St. Petersburg and the neighboring villages was dissected, plank by plank, and its foundations dug up and ransacked for hidden treasure — and not by boys, but men — pretty grave, unromantic men, too, some of them. Wherever Tom and Huck appeared they were courted, admired, stared at. The boys were not able to remember that their remarks had possessed weight before; but now their sayings were treasured and repeated; everything they did seemed somehow to be regarded as remarkable; they had evidently lost the power of doing and saying commonplace things; moreover, their past history was raked up and discovered to bear marks of conspicuous originality. The village paper published biographical sketches of the boys.

读者可以好好松口气了。汤姆和哈克的意外横财轰动了圣彼得堡这个穷乡僻壤小村镇。如此大的数量，又全是现金，简直难以置信。到处都在谈论此事，羡慕，赞叹，甚至有人因为过分激动，精神紧张，走路都走不稳了。圣彼得堡和邻镇上每间闹鬼的屋子都被挖开了，木板被一块块拆掉，地基也被挖出来找财宝——这一切并不是孩子们做的，而是大人，其中一部分还是相当严肃务实的大人。汤姆和哈克无论在哪里出现，都有人巴结、崇拜他们，或者一直盯着他们看。两个孩子记不得以前他们的话是否有分量，现在他俩说什么都受到重视，被人重复；他俩做什么都被认为意义重大。显然，他俩已经失去了说普通的话做普通的事的权利，更有甚者，两人的历史都被翻了出来，说从那时他们就显现出了超凡的创造力。村里的报纸刊登了两个孩子的小传。

The Widow Douglas put Huck's money out at six per cent, and Judge Thatcher did the same with Tom's at Aunt Polly's request. Each lad had an income, now, that was simply prodigious — a dollar for every weekday in the year and half of the Sundays. It was just what the minister got — no, it was what he was promised — he generally couldn't collect it. A dollar and a quarter a week would board, lodge, and school a boy in those old simple days — and clothe him and wash him, too, for that matter.

道格拉斯寡妇把哈克的钱按六分利息借了出去，受波莉姨妈委托，撒切尔法官以同样的方法汤姆的钱处理了。现在每个孩子都有一笔收入了，而且数目巨大——一年中的所有工作日和半数的星期日，每天都有一块大洋。这相当牧师的收入——不，是承诺给牧师的收入——一般来说他拿不到那么多。在那个简单的时代，1元2角5分钱够一个孩子吃饭、住宿、上学一星期，连穿衣、洗澡等都包括在内。

Judge Thatcher had conceived a great opinion of Tom. He said that no commonplace boy would ever have got his daughter out of the cave.

撒切尔法官对汤姆评价甚高，他说一个平庸的孩子，绝不可能把他的女儿从洞中救出来。

When Becky told her father, in strict confidence, how Tom had taken her whipping at school, the Judge was visibly moved; and when she pleaded grace for the mighty lie which Tom had told in order to shift that whipping from her shoulders to his own, the Judge said with a fine outburst that it was a noble, a generous, a magnanimous lie — a lie that was worthy to hold up its head and march down through history breast to breast with George Washington's lauded Truth about the hatchet! Becky thought her father had never looked so tall and so superb as when he walked the floor and stamped his foot and said that. She went straight off and told Tom about it.

当贝基悄悄地告诉他，在学校汤姆曾替她挨鞭子时，法官显然被感动了。她请求父亲原谅汤姆。汤姆撒了个大谎主要是为了替她挨鞭笞。法官激动地大声说，那是一个高尚的、慷慨的、宽宏大量的谎话。这个谎话完全有资格抬头挺胸，昂首阔步的迈进历史，与华盛顿那段广受褒奖的关于斧头的坦白比肩！当法官踏着地板，跺着脚说出这番话时，贝基觉得父亲从来没有这么高大、伟岸过。她直接跑去把这事告诉了汤姆。

Judge Thatcher hoped to see Tom a great lawyer or a great soldier some day. He said he meant to look to it that Tom should be admitted to the National Military Academy and afterward trained in the best law school in the country, in order that he might be ready for either career or both.

撒切尔法官希望汤姆有朝一日能成为伟大的律师或是军人。他说他打算安排汤姆进国家军事学院，然后再到全国最好的法学院深造，这样将来就可以做律师或者军人，也可以身兼二职。

Huck Finn's wealth and the fact that he was now under the Widow Douglas' protection introduced him into society — no, dragged him into it, hurled him into it — and his sufferings were almost more than he could bear. The widow's servants kept him clean and neat, combed and brushed, and they bedded him nightly in unsympathetic sheets that had not one little spot or stain which he could press to his heart and know for a friend. He had to eat with knife and fork; he had to use napkin, cup, and plate; he had to learn his book, he had to go to church; he had to talk so properly that speech was become insipid in his mouth; whithersoever he turned, the bars and shackles of civilization shut him in and bound him hand and foot.

有了钱，又受道格拉斯寡妇监护，哈克·费恩踏入了社交圈子——不对，他是被拖进去，扔进去的——对他来说苦不堪言。寡妇的佣人又梳又刷，把他收拾得干净整齐，每晚又替他铺上没有一点人情味的床单：没有一个污点可以让他捂在胸口，就像对老朋友那样。他得用刀叉吃饭，还要使餐巾、杯子和碟子；他又得念书，又要上教堂。他必须谈吐得体，话在他嘴里都变得没滋没味了。无论走到哪里，文明都束缚着他的手脚。

He bravely bore his miseries three weeks, and then one day turned up missing. For forty-eight hours the widow hunted for him everywhere in great distress. The public were profoundly concerned; they searched high and low, they dragged the river for his body. Early the third morning Tom Sawyer wisely went poking among some old empty hogsheads down behind the abandoned slaughterhouse, and in one of them he found the refugee. Huck had slept there; he had just breakfasted upon some stolen odds and ends of food, and was lying off, now, in comfort, with his pipe. He was unkempt, uncombed, and clad in the same old ruin of rags that had made him picturesque in the days when he was free and happy. Tom rounted him out, told him the trouble he had been causing, and urged him to go home. Huck's face lost its tranquil content, and took a melancholy cast. He said:

哈克硬着头皮忍了三个星期，终于有一天不见了。寡妇非常难过，两天里四处去找他。公众们对此也十分关注，他们高高低低都搜过了，还到河里去打捞他的尸体。第三天一大早，汤姆很明智的找了找废弃屠宰场后面的几只旧空桶，结果在一只空桶中发现了逃难的哈克。哈克昨天睡在这里，现在刚吃完早饭，吃的全是些偷来的剩饭剩菜，正舒舒服服地躺在那里抽烟斗呢。他邋里邋遢，蓬头垢面，穿着过去的烂衣服，在那些自由自在的日子里，这些衣服才是独一无二的。汤姆把哈克撵出来，和他讲了惹的麻烦，要他赶快回家。哈克脸上的悠然自得立马消失了，一副愁相。他说：

"Don't talk about it, Tom. I've tried it, and it don't work; it don't work, Tom. It ain't for me; I ain't used to it. The widder's good to me, and friendly; but I can't stand them ways. She makes me git up just at the same time every morning; she makes me wash, they comb me all to thunder; she won't let me sleep in the woodshed; I got to wear them blamed clothes that just smothers me, Tom; they don't seem to let any air git through 'em, somehow; and they're so rotten nice that I can't set down, nor lay down, nor roll around anywher's; I hain't slid on a cellar door for — well, it 'pears to be years; I got to go to church and sweat and sweat — I hate them ornery sermons! I can't ketch a fly in there, I can't chaw. I got to wear shoes all Sunday. The widder eats by a bell; she goes to bed by a bell; she gits up by a bell — everything's so awful reg'lar a body can't stand it."

“别说了，汤姆，我已经试过了，那没有用，没用，汤姆。那种生活不适合我，我不习惯。寡妇待我很好，也很友善，可是我受不了那一套。她每天早晨让我准时起床；叫我洗脸；使劲给我梳；不让我在柴棚里睡觉，还要穿那些该死的衣服，绷得我喘不上气。汤姆，那些衣服好像一点空气也透不过来，而且他妈的那么好看，弄得我坐也不是，躺也不是，打滚更不行了。我再也没溜到地窖去过——像是有好多年了都没去过了，还得去教堂，不停地出汗，出汗，我恨死那些一文不值的布道了！在那里我不能捉苍蝇，不能嚼口香糖，整个星期日都得穿鞋。寡妇听钟声吃饭，听钟声上床睡觉，听钟声起床——什么事情都那么规律，人会受不了的。”

"Well, everybody does that way, Huck."

“不过，哈克，大家都是这样的。”

"Tom, it don't make no difference. I ain't everybody, and I can't stand it. It's awful to be tied up so. And grub comes too easy — I don't take no interest in vittles, that way. I got to ask to go a-fishing; I got to ask to go in a-swimming — dern'd if I hain't got to ask to do everything. Well, I'd got to talk so nice it wasn't no comfort — I'd got to go up in the attic and rip out awhile, every day, to git a taste in my mouth, or I'd a died, Tom. The widder wouldn't let me smoke; she wouldn't let me yell, she wouldn't let me gape, nor stretch, nor scratch, before folks —" (Then with a spasm of special irritation and injury) — "And dad fetch it, she prayed all the time! I never see such a woman! I had to shove, Tom — I just had to. And besides, that school's going to open, and I'd a had to go to it — well, I wouldn't stand that, Tom. Looky-here, Tom, being rich ain't what it's cracked up to be. It's just worry and worry, and sweat and sweat, and a-wishing you was dead all the time. Now these clothes suits me, and this bar'l suits me, and I ain't ever going to shake 'em any more. Tom, I wouldn't ever got into all this trouble if it hadn't 'a' been for that money; now you just take my sheer of it along with your'n, and gimme a ten-center sometimes — not many times, becuz I don't give a dern for a thing 'thout it's tollable hard to git — and you go and beg off for me with the widder."

“汤姆，你这样说也没什么用，我不是大家了，我受不了，捆得那样紧真是太难受了。还有，吃的东西太容易到手了，我对于那样的食物没兴趣。钓鱼要请示寡妇，游个泳也得先问问她，该死，干什么事都要先问她才行。说话也得斯斯文文的，太不舒服了——我只好每天跑到阁楼上，狠狠发泄一通，这样嘴里才有滋味，要不然我就死了，汤姆。寡妇还不让我抽烟，不让我大喊大叫，不让我在人前打哈欠，伸懒腰，抓痒痒——”（哈克显出一副十分烦躁和委屈的样子。）“还有呢，她整天祈祷个没完！我从来没见过这样的女人。我得逃走，汤姆——不逃不行。况且，学校快要开学了，不跑就得上学，那更受不了了。喂，汤姆，有钱也不像人们说得那么好。发财就是发愁再发愁，受罪又受罪，最后你真希望死了算了。这些衣服才适合我，这桶也合适，我再也不打算离开这儿了。汤姆，要不是那些钱，我也不会卷进这么多的麻烦里，现在，你把我那份也拿走吧，偶尔给我把毛票就行了，不要常给，因为东西来的太容易就一钱不值了。你就到寡妇那儿去，求求她饶了我吧。”

"Oh, Huck, you know I can't do that. Tain't fair; and besides if you'll try this thing just a while longer you'll come to like it."

“噢，哈克，你知道，我不能这样做。这不太好，如果再多试一段时间，你会渐渐喜欢那种生活的。”

"Like it! Yes — the way I'd like a hot stove if I was to set on it long enough. No, Tom, I won't be rich, and I won't live in them cussed smothery houses. I like the woods, and the river, and hogsheads, and I'll stick to 'em, too. Blame it all! just as we'd got guns, and a cave, and all just fixed to rob, here this dern foolishness has got to come up and spile it all!"

“喜欢那种生活！就像如果我在热炉子上坐很长时间也会喜欢那样似的。我不干，汤姆，我不要当富人，也不想住在那喘不过气来的倒霉房子里。我喜欢森林、河流、那些大桶，我决不离开这些东西。真是倒霉！刚弄了几条枪，找到了山洞，准备去当强盗，却偏偏碰上了这种蠢事，去它的吧。”

Tom saw his opportunity —

汤姆瞅到了机会——

"Looky-here, Huck, being rich ain't going to keep me back from turning robber."

“喂，哈克，富了也不妨碍我们当强盗啊。”

"No! Oh, good-licks, are you in real deadwood earnest, Tom?"

“不，你说话当真，汤姆？”

"Just as dead earnest as I'm a-sitting here. But Huck, we can't let you into the gang if you ain't respectable, you know."

“就像我人坐在这儿一样，千真万确。不过哈克，如果你不够体面的话，我们不能让你入伙。”

Huck's joy was quenched.

哈克的高兴劲被一下子熄灭了。

"Can't let me in, Tom? Didn't you let me go for a pirate?"

“不让我入伙，汤姆？你不是让我当过海盗吗？”

"Yes, but that's different. A robber is more high-toned than what a pirate is — as a general thing. In most countries they're awful high up in the nobility — dukes and such."

“是，不过这是不同的，总的说来，强盗比海盗格调要高。在许多国家，强盗在贵族中都有很高地位，公爵之类。”

"Now, Tom, hain't you always ben friendly to me? You wouldn't shet me out, would you, Tom? You wouldn't do that, now would you, Tom?"

“汤姆，你一直对我很好，不是吗？你不会不让我加入的，对吧，汤姆？你不会这么做的，汤姆，是不是？”

"Huck, I wouldn't want to, and I don't want to — but what would people say? Why, they'd say, 'Mph! Tom Sawyer's Gang! pretty low characters in it! They'd mean you, Huck. You wouldn't like that, and I wouldn't."

“哈克，我不愿意那样，也不想那样，可是大家会怎么说呢？他们会说：哼！汤姆·索亚帮！全都是些低贱的人。他们指的是你，哈克。你不会喜欢这样的，我也不喜欢。”

Huck was silent for some time, engaged in a mental struggle. Finally he said:

哈克沉默了一会，做着激烈的思想斗争。最后他开了腔：

"Well, I'll go back to the widder for a month and tackle it and see if I can come to stand it, if you'll let me b'long to the gang, Tom."

“得，我再回到寡妇家里应付上一个月，看能不能适应那种生活，不过你会让我加入的吧，汤姆？”

"All right, Huck, it's a whiz! Come along, old chap, and I'll ask the widow to let up on you a little, Huck."

“好吧，哈克，一言为定！走，老伙计，我去跟寡妇讲，让她对你松一些。”

"Will you, Tom — now will you? That's good. If she'll let up on some of the roughest things, I'll smoke private and cuss private, and crowd through or bust. When you going to start the gang and turn robbers?"

“真的，汤姆？真的吗？这太好了。要是在一些最要紧的事情上，她能宽容一些，比如我可以背地里抽抽烟、骂骂人。要么挺过去，要么完蛋拉倒。你打算什么时候结伙当强盗？”

"Oh, right off. We'll get the boys together and have the initiation tonight, maybe."

“噢，这就干。把孩子们集中起来，也许今晚就举行入伙仪式。”

"Have the which?"

“举行什么？”

"Have the initiation."

“举行入伙仪式。”

"What's that?"

“那是什么？”

"It's to swear to stand by one another, and never tell the gang's secrets, even if you're chopped all to flinders, and kill anybody and all his family that hurts one of the gang."

“就是发誓互相帮忙，永远不泄露秘密，就是被剁成肉酱也不能泄密。如果有人伤害了帮中的人，就把他和他全家统统干掉。”

"That's gay — that's mighty gay, Tom, I tell you."

“我跟你说，这真有意思，太好玩了，汤姆。”

"Well, I bet it is. And all that swearing's got to be done at midnight, in the lonesomest, awfulest place you can find — a ha'nted house is the best, but they're all ripped up now."

“对，肯定的。宣誓都得在半夜举行，要在最偏僻、最恐怖的地方，闹鬼的房子最好，可现在全被拆了。”

"Well, midnight's good, anyway, Tom."

“不管怎么说，半夜时分还是不错的，汤姆。”

"Yes, so it is. And you've got to swear on a coffin, and sign it with blood."

“对。还要对棺材发誓，咬破指头画押呐。”

"Now, that's something like! Why, it's a million times bullier than pirating. I'll stick to the widder till I rot, Tom; and if I git to be a reg'lar ripper of a robber, and everybody talking 'bout it, I reckon she'll be proud she snaked me in out of the wet."

“这才像样！这比当海盗要强一万倍。汤姆，我到死都跟着寡妇了。要是能成为一名响当当的大盗，人人都会谈到我，我想，寡妇也会为自己把我从困境中拉出来而自豪的。”





CONCLUSION


结尾

SO endeth this chronicle. It being strictly a history of a boy, it must stop here; the story could not go much further without becoming the history of a man. When one writes a novel about grown people, he knows exactly where to stop — that is, with a marriage; but when he writes of juveniles, he must stop where he best can.

故事至此结束。因为严格地说，这是个儿童的故事，所以到这里必须停下来了，要讲后面的故事就不得不涉及成人的故事了。写一部有关于成年人的小说，作者很清楚到哪里结束——结婚成家就完事了，但是写孩子的故事则得见好就收。

Most of the characters that perform in this book still live, and are prosperous and happy. Some day it may seem worth while to take up the story of the younger ones again and see what sort of men and women they turned out to be; therefore it will be wisest not to reveal any of that part of their lives at present.

本书中的许多人物仍然健在，过着富裕快乐的生活。也许有朝一日，这个年轻人的故事值得续写，看看书中的小孩子们长成了什么样子的男人或者女人。因此，最明智的做法就是不要透露任何他们现在的生活。





